---
Taxonomy: Coronaviridae
Source URL: https://ictv.global/report/chapter/coronaviridae/coronaviridae
---

# Coronaviridae 完整报告



## Family: Coronaviridae

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Family: *Coronaviridae*

**Patrick C.Y. Woo, Raoul J. de Groot, Bart Haagmans, Susanna K.P. Lau, Benjamin W. Neuman, Stanley Perlman, Isabel Sola, Lia van der Hoek, Antonio C.P. Wong and Shiou-Hwei Yeh**

The citation for this ICTV Report chapter is the summary published as:

Woo et al., (2023), ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: *Coronaviridae* 2023, Journal of General Virology (2023) 104, 001843

**Corresponding author:** Patrick C.Y. Woo (E-mail: [email protected])  
**Edited by:** Peter Simmonds and Stuart G, Siddell  
**Posted:** February 2023

## Summary

Members of the family *Coronaviridae*, a monophyletic group of viruses in the order *Nidovirales*, are enveloped, positive-sense RNA viruses that are known to infect four of the seven classes of vertebrates: mammals and birds (orthocoronaviruses), amphibians (letoviruses) and bony fish (pironaviruses); (Table 1 *Coronaviridae*). In terms of genome size and genetic complexity, members of the family *Coronaviridae*, are among the largest RNA viruses identified so far. RNA viruses with larger genomes are also members of the *Nidovirales*, including members of the species *Alphaabyssovirus aplyiaes* (35.9 kb, family *Abyssoviridae*) and *Alphamononivirus schmidteae* (41.1 kb, family *Mononiviridae*), which infect invertebrates. Replication has been studied in detail only for orthocoronaviruses. Orthocoronavirus virions attach to host cell surface receptors via their spikes and release their genome into the target cell cytoplasm via fusion of the viral envelope with the plasma membrane or the limiting membrane of endocytic vesicles. Members of the family *Coronaviridae* infect humans and a variety of animals resulting in diverse clinical manifestations, ranging from asymptomatic to severe fatal diseases. Members of two species of orthocoronavirus, *Betacoronavirus pandemicum* and *Betacoronavirus cameli*, are highly pathogenic to humans, leading to the SARS and MERS epidemics, and the COVID-19 pandemic.

**Table 1** ***Coronaviridae*** **Characteristics of members of the family** ***Coronaviridae***

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **Characteristic** | **Description** |
| Example | murine hepatitis virus A59 (AY700211), species *Betacoronavirus muris* |
| Virion | Enveloped, pleomorphic but often quasi-spherical, 80–160 nm with apparent spike projections |
| Genome | 22–36 kb of positive-sense RNA |
| Replication | Through an antigenomic RNA generated by continuous transcription; gene expression through discontinuous transcription of a nested set of co-terminal subgenomic negative-sense RNAs which are copied into subgenomic mRNAs |
| Translation | From capped and polyadenylated genomic and subgenomic mRNAs |
| Host range | Vertebrates (mammals, birds, amphibians and fish) |
| Taxonomy | Realm *Riboviria*, kingdom *Orthornavirae*, phylum *Pisuviricota*, class *Pisoniviricetes*, order *Nidovirales*, suborder *Cornidovirineae*, family *Coronaviridae*; the family includes 3 subfamilies (*Letovirinae*, *Orthocoronavirinae* and *Pitovirinae*), 6 genera, 28 subgenera, and 54 species |

## Virion

#### Morphology

Virions of members of the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae* are spherical, 80–160 nm, enveloped particles decorated with large club- or petal-shaped surface projections (the “peplomers” or “spikes”), which in electron micrographs of spherical particles create an image reminiscent of the solar corona (Barcena *et al.,* 2009) (Figure 1 *Coronaviridae*). This inspired the name “coronaviruses”, originally for the viruses now grouped in the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae* and later adopted for the whole family. Orthocoronavirus virion assembly is achieved by budding of preformed nucleocapsids at smooth intracellular membranes of endoplasmic reticulum/early Golgi compartments (Perlman and Netland 2009). Members of the subgenus *Embecovirus* (genus *Betacoronavirus*) display a second type of surface projection, 5–7 nm in length, comprised of the homodimeric hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) glycoprotein (Figure 1E.*Coronaviridae*) (Hurdiss *et al.,* 2020).

Orthocoronavirus virions studied by cryo-electron tomography are homogeneous in size and spherical (envelope outer diameter 85±5 nm) (Barcena *et al.,* 2009). The envelope is exceptionally thick (7.8±0.7 nm) in comparison to typical biological membranes (average thickness 4 nm) (Barcena *et al.,* 2009), and is packed with a matrix network consisting of membrane protein dimers (Neuman *et al.,* 2011). The viral ribonucleoprotein consists of the RNA genome and nucleoprotein (N), and is organized in short helical units that are arranged loosely in the virion interior (Yao *et al.,* 2020), but can be appended to the inner surface of the envelope at a distance of about 4 nm (Figure 1 *Coronaviridae*) (Chang *et al.,* 2006).

For members of the subfamily *Letovirinae*, the shape and size of virions are unknown, but downstream open reading frames (ORFs) encode a large spike (S)-like protein, a three-pass transmembrane protein that resembles the coronavirus membrane (M) protein, an envelope (E)-like protein and a putative nucleocapsid (N) protein (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). Several of these putative structural proteins have predicted transmembrane regions, suggesting that virions are enveloped (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

For members of the subfamily *Pitovirinae*, the shape and size of virions are similarly undetermined. However, the genome of members of the species *Alphapironavirus salmonis* (for example Pacific salmon nidovirus, MK611985) encodes proteins putatively identified as similar to the coronavirus S, M, E and N proteins that may create virions morphologically related to those of other coronaviruses.

|  |
| --- |
| Coronaviridae virion EM and schematic |
| **Figure 1.*****Coronaviridae*** Coronavirus virion morphology. (A, B) Negative-staining (2% phosphotungstic acid) electron micrographs of (A) a virion of murine hepatitis virus (MHV) laboratory strain A59 that lacks HE expression and (B) a recombinant MHV-A59 virus in which HE expression was restored (courtesy Jean Lepault, Laboratory of Molecular and Structural Virology, Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France). (C, D) Cryo-electron tomographs of MHV. A virtual slice (7.5 nm thick) through a reconstructed MHV particle (left) with highlighted features superimposed (right). The envelope is colored in orange with conspicuous striations highlighted; the nucleocapsid region is colored in blue. Note low-density region (ca. 4 nm) between envelope and nucleocapsid (reprinted with permission from (Barcena *et al.,* 2009) (E) Schematic representation of an embecovirus virion. |

#### Physicochemical and physical properties

For members of the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae*, the estimated Mr of the virion is 400×106, its buoyant density in sucrose and CsCl is 1.15–1.20 g cm−3 and 1.23–1.24 g cm−3, respectively, and its S20,W is 300–500S (Gorbalenya *et al.,* 2006). Particles are sensitive to heat, lipid solvents, non-ionic detergents, formaldehyde, oxidizing agents and UV irradiation (Bedell *et al.,* 2016, Patterson *et al.,* 2020).

No information is available for members of the subfamilies *Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae*.

#### Nucleic acid

Genomes of members of the family *Coronaviridae* consist of positive-sense, linear and infectious RNA of 22–36 kb that is capped, polyadenylated and polycistronic (Barnard 2008). For the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae*, the RNA is 26–31 kb and is infectious (Fehr and Perlman 2015).

The only letovirus genome studied is an assembly of 22 304 nucleotides, potentially encoding proteins equivalent to those of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) from the nsp3 gene to the 3′-end (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). This sequence is missing the 5′-terminal sequences of orthocoronaviruses, including a 5′-non-coding region and sequences corresponding to coronavirus nsp1 to part of nsp3 (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). The missing genomic region is 1500–4000 nucleotides compared to the complete genomes of the small deltacoronaviruses or the relatively large alphacoronaviruses (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). The letovirus genome contains a 572-nucleotide 3′-non-coding region and an 18-nucleotide poly-adenosine tail. The start codons of the putative S and M ORFs overlap with the stop codons of preceding ORFs, suggesting a relatively compact genome (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

The only available pirovirus sequence (Pacific salmon nidovirus, MK611985) studied is 36 652 nucleotides with an internal sequence gap located after the end of ORF1b and before the beginning of the 3′-terminal region encoding the putative structural and accessory proteins, which raises the possibility of this being a bipartite genome. The large genome is partly due to the presence of a large putative accessory gene of unknown function. The available genome contains a 22-nucleotide poly-adenosine tail.

#### Proteins

Orthocoronaviruses all share the following structural proteins:

* the spike protein (S), a large homo-trimeric type I membrane glycoprotein. S is a class I fusion protein that mediates receptor-binding and membrane fusion (Bosch *et al.,* 2003, Alsaadi *et al.,* 2019).
* the membrane glycoprotein (M), an integral type III membrane protein with predicted triple-spanning NexoCendo topology (Locker *et al.,* 1992). Depending on the virus species, the amino-terminal ectodomain is decorated with *N*- or *O*-linked glycans (Voss *et al.,* 2009). The long C-terminal endodomain, comprising an amphiphilic region and a hydrophilic tail, is believed to associate with the inner leaflet of the membrane to form a matrix-like lattice, which would explain the remarkable thickness of the orthocoronavirus envelope (Figure 1 *Coronaviridae*) (de Haan *et al.,* 1998). In transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV, species *Alphacoronavirus suis*) infected pigs, a second population of tetra-spanning M proteins, adopting an Nexo-Cexo topology in the viral envelope, has been described (Escors *et al.,* 2001); M can adopt two conformations, which are elongated and compact M proteins (Neuman *et al.,* 2011). The elongated form of M protein is responsible for the formation of a convex, rigidified viral envelope (Neuman *et al.,* 2011).
* the envelope protein (E), a small pentameric integral membrane protein with ion channel and/or membrane permeabilizing (viroporin) activities (Ye and Hogue 2007). With around 20 copies per particle, the E protein is only a minor structural component (Godet *et al.,* 1992). Although its precise function remains to be defined, the E plays a role in virion assembly and morphogenesis and has been identified as a virulence factor for some viruses including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) (Perlman and Netland 2009, DeDiego *et al.,* 2011, Fett *et al.,* 2013, Alsaadi *et al.,* 2020).
* the nucleocapsid protein (N), an RNA-binding phosphoprotein. ADP-ribosylation of N protein is observed during infection (Grunewald *et al.,* 2018). Besides its obvious function in genome encapsidation, the N protein is also involved in RNA synthesis and translation, displays RNA chaperone activity, and acts as a type I interferon antagonist (Enjuanes *et al.,* 2006, Saikatendu *et al.,* 2007, Wu *et al.,* 2009, Zuniga *et al.,* 2010). Nucleocapsids are helical and can be released from the virion by treatment with detergents (Chen *et al.,* 2007). The orthocoronavirus nucleocapsid appears to be loosely-wound, with small helical units distributed throughout the virion interior (Yao *et al.,* 2020), that of letovirus remains to be characterised (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

Members of different orthocoronavirus species can have additional accessory proteins incorporated into the virion. For example, members of the subgenus *Embecovirus* in the genus *Betacoronavirus* code for an accessory homo-dimeric type I envelope glycoprotein, the hemagglutinin-esterase (HE). This protein mediates reversible virion attachment to *O*-acetylated sialic acids by acting both as a lectin and as a sialate-*O*-acetylesterase (Zeng *et al.,* 2008, Langereis *et al.,* 2010). The HE of MHV shares about 30% aa sequence identity with the HE protein of toroviruses (family *Tobaniviridae,* which are also classified in the order *Nidovirales* to which coronaviruses are assigned). However, it is equally related to subunit 1 of the hemagglutinin-esterase fusion protein (HEF) of the structurally dissimilar influenza C virus (family *Orthomyxoviridae*) (Zeng *et al.,* 2008). In virions of MHV, the stoichiometric ratio of N, M and HE proteins is approximately 1 : 2.6 : 0.4; in TGEV, N and M occur at a ratio of 1 : 3. There are no reliable estimates for the S protein as it is present in small quantities in virus particles, may occur both in cleaved and uncleaved forms, and is easily lost during virus purification.

Members of the family *Coronaviridae* all seem to share three envelope protein types, the envelope (E), membrane (M) and spike (S) proteins, which are essential for virion morphogenesis or infectivity or both (Barcena *et al.,* 2009, Yuan *et al.,* 2017). Similarities in size, predicted structures and presumed functions suggest a common ancestry, and the distant but clear sequence similarities observed between letovirus and orthocoronavirus S proteins lend further support to this view (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

The 3′-proximal region of the letovirus genome contains six ORFs that could encode proteins of 50 or more amino acids, including the viral structural proteins (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). The first ORF encodes a large S-like protein of 1526 amino acids with an amino-terminal signal peptide and a carboxyl-terminal transmembrane region (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). The second and third ORFs encode respectively, a unique single-pass transmembrane protein of 55 amino acids and a unique soluble 157-amino acid protein; these are likely strain-specific accessory proteins (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). The fourth ORF encodes an E-like protein of 77 amino acids with an amino-terminal predicted transmembrane region followed by a potential amphipathic helix (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). The fifth ORF encodes a 241-amino acid three-pass transmembrane protein resembling coronavirus M protein. The sixth ORF putatively encodes an N protein of 459 amino acids (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

The 3′-proximal region of the pironavirus genome contains five ORFs that are predicted to encode proteins of 130 or more amino acids, including the viral structural proteins. The first ORF encodes a large lamina-associated polypeptide 1C (LAP1C)-like protein of 2038 amino acids. The second ORF encodes a S-like protein of 1213 amino acids. The third ORF encodes an E-like protein of 132 amino acids. The fourth ORF encodes a 446-amino acid M-like protein. The fifth ORF putatively encodes an N protein of 513 amino acids

#### Lipids

Orthocoronaviruses acquire their lipid envelopes by budding at membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum, intermediate compartment and/or Golgi complex of the host cells (Klumperman *et al.,* 1994). The S and E proteins are palmitoylated (Corse and Machamer 2002, Liao *et al.,* 2006, Petit *et al.,* 2007, Lopez *et al.,* 2008).

No information is available for members of the subfamilies *Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae.*

#### Carbohydrates

The S protein of orthocoronaviruses and the HE protein of members of the subgenus *Embecovirus* are heavily glycosylated and contain multiple *N*-linked glycans (20–35 and 5–11, respectively) (de Groot 2006, Zeng *et al.,* 2008). The M protein of orthocoronaviruses contains a small number of either *N*- or *O*-linked glycans, depending on the virus, located near the amino-terminus (Holmes *et al.,* 1981, Voss *et al.,* 2006). The nsp3 ectodomains of SARS-CoV and MHV are *N*-linked glycosylated (Harcourt *et al.,* 2004, Kanjanahaluethai *et al.,* 2007). The ORF3 accessory protein of human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) is *N*-glycosylated at the N-terminus (Muller *et al.,* 2010). Orthocoronavirus E proteins are not glycosylated.

No information is available for members of the subfamilies *Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae.*

## Genome organization and replication

Members of the family *Coronaviridae* have genomes with multiple ORFs (Figure 2 *Coronaviridae*) in the order 5′-NCR-replicase-S-E-M-N-NCR-3′ (genes are named after their product) (Figure 3.*Coronaviridae*), with the genome functioning as mRNA for the replicase gene (de Vries *et al.,* 1997). The replicase gene is comprised of two overlapping ORFs called 1a and 1b that occupy the 5′-two thirds of the genome. The replicase gene is translated to produce the polyprotein pp1a and, following programmed −1 ribosomal frameshifting, a C-terminally extended product, pp1ab (Bredenbeek *et al.,* 1990). The polyproteins are co- and post-translationally processed by virus-encoded proteinases and, thus, are not detectable as full-length proteins in virus-infected cells (Graham and Denison 2006). The N-termini of pp1a and pp1ab are processed by one or two papain-like proteinases, whereas the C-terminal half of pp1a and the ORF1b-encoded part of pp1ab are cleaved at 11 well-conserved sites by the main proteinase (Mpro or 3CLpro), an enzyme conserved within members of the order *Nidovirales* with a chymotrypsin-like fold that has a poliovirus 3C proteinase-like substrate specificity with a cysteine as the active site nucleophile (Ziebuhr *et al.,* 2000, Ziebuhr 2005). Proteolytic processing of the replicase protein results in the production of 14 to 16 mature products, commonly referred to as non-structural proteins (nsps) and numbered according to their position from the N-terminus of the virus polyprotein (Figure 2 *Coronaviridae*). Many nsps are unique enzymes involved in one or more essential steps in viral replication. Others appear to be exclusively involved in virus–host interactions (including immune evasion) and are dispensable for virus propagation *in vitro* (Table 2 *Coronaviridae*).

|  |
| --- |
| Coronaviridae: genome organisation |
| **Figure 2.*****Coronaviridae.***Coronavirus genome organization and expression. (Upper panel). Schematic representation of the genome of MHV. ORFs are represented by boxes, indicated by number (above) and encoded protein (acronyms below). Regions encoding key domains in replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab are colour-coded with hydrophobic segments shown in dark grey. The 5′-leader sequence is depicted by a small red box. The arrow between ORF 1a and 1b represents the ribosomal frameshifting site. The poly(A) tail is indicated by “A(n)”. Red arrowheads indicate the locations of transcription-regulating sequences (TRSs). PL (green) papain-like proteinase 1 (PL1pro); PL (red), papain-like proteinase 2 (PL2pro); A, ADP-ribose-1″phosphatase (macrodomain); Mpro, 3C-like main protease; Pr, noncanonical RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, putative primase; RdRP, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; Z, zinc-binding domain; Hel, helicase domain; Exo, 3′-to-5′ exoribonuclease domain; N7, guanine-N7-methyltransferase; U, nidoviral uridylate-specific endoribonuclease (NendoU); MT, ribose-2′-*O*-methyltransferase domain; HE, hemagglutinin-esterase; S, spike protein; E, envelope protein; M, membrane protein, N, nucleocapsid protein. (Lower panel) Processing of the replicase polyproteins and structural relationship between the genomic RNA and subgenomic mRNAs of coronaviruses. Arrows indicate cleavage sites for PL1pro (green), PL2pro (red) and Mpro (blue). The locations of the non-structural proteins (nsp’s) are indicated by their number (Table 2 *Coronaviridae*). mRNA species are numbered as by convention on the basis of their size, from large to small, with the genome designated as RNA1. For the sg mRNAs only ORF(s) that are translated are shown. |

|  |
| --- |
| Coronavirdae genomes |
| **Figure 3** ***Coronaviridae*** Genome organizations of selected viruses from each genus. Whole genome organizations with ORFs are depicted as coloured boxes with rosybrown, ORF1a; pink, ORF1b; red, S; cyan, E; yellow, M and magenta, N and skyblue, lamina-associated polypeptide 1C (LAP1C). ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

**Table 2** ***Coronaviridae*** Cleavage products of orthocoronavirus replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab: names and assigned functions\*

| **Protein** | **Assigned function** |
| --- | --- |
| nsp1† | IFN antagonist |
|  | Degradation of host mRNAs |
|  | Inhibition of translation |
|  | Cell cycle arrest |
| nsp2 | Unknown; associates with RTCs |
| nsp3 | Papain-like proteinase PL1pro; polyprotein processing |
|  | Papain-like proteinase PL2pro; polyprotein processing, DUB |
|  | ADP-ribose-1″phosphatase (macrodomain); RNA-binding; N protein binding |
|  | IFN antagonist |
|  | DMV formation |
| nsp4 | DMV formation |
| nsp5 | 3C-like protease (3CLpro); polyprotein processing |
| nsp6 | DMV formation |
| nsp7 | ssRNA binding; Subunit of RdRP holoenzyme |
| nsp8 | Subunit of RdRP holoenzyme; Putative primase; Forms hexadecameric supercomplex with nsp7; Putative 3′-terminal adenylyltransferase |
| nsp9 | Putative ssRNA binding; associates with RTCs; involved in RNA capping |
| nsp10 | Dodecameric zinc finger protein; associates with RTCs, stimulates nsp14 exonuclease and nsp16 methyltransferase activity; regulation of ribosomal frameshifting |
| nsp11 | Unknown |
| nsp12 | RdRP; NiRAN domain (NMPylase and putative RNA-capping enzyme) |
| nsp13 | Zinc-binding domain-containing Helicase |
|  | RNA 5′-triphosphatase |
| nsp14 | 3′→5′exoribonuclease (required for RdRP fidelity) |
|  | Guanine-N7-methyltransferase (RNA cap formation) |
| nsp15 | Hexameric uridylate-specific endoribonuclease |
| nsp16 | Ribose-2′-*O*-methyltransferase (RNA cap formation) |

IFN, interferon; RTC, replicase/transcriptase complex; DUB, deubiquitinating enzyme; DMV, double-membrane vesicles; NMP, nucleoside monophosphate.

\* references: (Joseph *et al.,* 2006, Su *et al.,* 2006, Joseph *et al.,* 2007, Neuman *et al.,* 2008, Perlman and Netland 2009, Angelini *et al.,* 2013, Becares *et al.,* 2016, Fehr *et al.,* 2016, Doyle *et al.,* 2018, V'Kovski *et al.,* 2021, Park *et al.,* 2022b)

† Absent in gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses.

The replicase polyproteins of members of the family *Coronaviridae* comprise a number of characteristic domains arranged in a conserved order (Figure 2 *Coronaviridae* and Table 2 *Coronaviridae*). Two ORF1-encoded replicase domains, an ADP-ribose-1″-phosphatase (ADRP, also called macrodomain; located in orthocoronavirus nsp3 but partially truncated in the letovirus genome) and a noncanonical “secondary” RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) with possible primase activity (nsp8) may represent diagnostic markers that distinguish members of the family *Coronaviridae* from members of other families in the order *Nidovirales* (Imbert *et al.,* 2006, Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

The entire viral replication cycle takes place in the cytoplasm and involves two processes, the production of full-length genomic RNAs (gRNA), known as replication, and the synthesis of subgenome-sized mRNAs (sgmRNA), known as transcription. The replication and transcription processes involve the generation of genome-length negative-sense strand and subgenomic negative-sense RNA intermediates, respectively (Sawicki and Sawicki 2005). Genomic and subgenomic negative-sense RNA molecules are produced from full length genomic RNA and serve as the templates for the synthesis of genomic and subgenomic mRNAs, respectively (Sawicki and Sawicki 2005).

The structural basis for orthocoronavirus RNA synthesis is increasingly well understood, though questions remain about the order of some steps in the process. RNA synthesis is catalyzed by a replication–transcription complex (RTC) that contains proteins from pp1a and pp1b, in complexes that are rearranged to carry out RNA synthesis and capping activities (Yan *et al.,* 2021). During synthesis of positive-sense strand viral RNAs, the NiRAN domain of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (nsp12 or RdRP) transfers one or more nucleotides to nsp9, which is then involved in transfer of the cap structure to the viral RNA (Lehmann *et al.,* 2015, Slanina *et al.,* 2021, Park *et al.,* 2022a). Viral RNA synthesis then involves dual polymerase activities of the nsp7+nsp8 complex and the main viral polymerase, nsp12 (te Velthuis *et al.,* 2012). RNA cap methylation is carried out by complexes of nsp10, nsp14 and nsp16 (Chen *et al.,* 2009, Chen *et al.,* 2011). The orthocoronavirus replication-transcription complex is composed of viral and host proteins and associated with an interconnected network of modified intracellular membranes and double-membrane vesicles that are presumably endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived (Gosert *et al.,* 2002, Al-Mulla *et al.,* 2014, Sola *et al.,* 2015), with access to the interior of the double-membrane vesicles via a molecular pore that contains at least some of the transmembrane domain-containing cleavage products from pp1a: nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 (Wolff *et al.,* 2020). Understanding of the replication cycle of letoviruses and piroviruses is limited. The existence of subgenomic mRNAs of M and N genes of letoviruses suggests these two genes are expressed (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). Similar genomic organization between orthocoronaviruses and letoviruses, including conservation of nsp3–16, suggest that they may use similar replication strategies and intracellular modifications (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

Replication of the genomic RNA uses a full-length negative-sense RNA as an intermediate. The 3′-proximal genes (putatively 6 in letoviruses and up to 12 in some orthocoronaviruses) code for the structural proteins and, in the case of orthocoronaviruses, a variable number of “accessory” or “niche-specific” proteins. These genes are expressed – as is typical for nidoviruses – from a 3′-coterminal nested set of capped and polyadenylated subgenomic mRNAs (Sethna *et al.,* 1989, Sawicki and Sawicki 1990, Sethna *et al.,* 1991).

For orthocoronaviruses, virus assembly involves budding of preformed nucleocapsids at membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum and early Golgi compartment and the completed virions are released via the exocytotic pathway (de Haan and Rottier 2005, Stertz *et al.,* 2007). A recent study suggests that betacoronaviruses can also utilize lysosome-mediated cell egress pathway (Ghosh *et al.,* 2020). The viral assembly mechanism remains to be elucidated for members of the subfamilies *Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae.*

Orthocoronavirus genomes contain 5′- and 3′- NCRs of 200–600 nt and 200–500 nt, respectively. Signals for genome replication and encapsidation reside not only in these NCRs, but also in adjacent and more internal coding regions (Brian and Baric 2005). Six ORFs are conserved family-wide and arranged in a fixed order: (as listed in the 5′-to-3′ direction) ORFs 1a and 1b, together comprising the replicase genes, and the ORFs for the structural proteins S, E, M and N (de Vries *et al.,* 1997). Downstream of ORF1b and interspersed between the structural protein genes, there exist various numbers of accessory genes, the products of which are generally dispensable for replication *in vitro*, but affect replication or pathogenicity during natural infection (Figure 2 *Coronaviridae*) (Zhao *et al.,* 2009, Niemeyer *et al.,* 2013, Fehr and Perlman 2015, Rabouw *et al.,* 2016, Canton *et al.,* 2018, Castano-Rodriguez *et al.,* 2018, Schroeder *et al.,* 2021).

These accessory genes may have been acquired through horizontal gene transfer and occasionally lost as viruses have adapted to new hosts and niches (Wu *et al.,* 2016b). The diversity of accessory genes between orthocoronavirus subgenera, species or strains attest to the plasticity and highly dynamic nature of the 3′-proximal third of the orthocoronavirus genome.

While the genome serves as mRNA for the replicase polyproteins, the 3′-proximal genes are expressed from a nested set of subgenomic mRNAs, the coding regions of which (the “body” sequences) are 3′-coterminal with the genome (Tijms *et al.,* 2001). Each of these mRNAs has a short 5′-leader sequence identical to the 5′-terminal end of the genome. All except the smallest mRNAs are structurally polycistronic but translation is restricted to the 5′-proximal ORF(s) (Figure 4 *Coronaviridae*).

Coronavirus discontinuous transcription is driven by short conserved sequence (CS) elements, included in a larger and more variable region commonly called the transcription-regulatory sequence (TRS) (Dufour *et al.,* 2011, Fehr and Perlman 2015) and depends on multiple factors including RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions (Sola *et al.,* 2015). A TRS copy is found at the 5′-end of the genome, immediately downstream of the leader sequence and preceding 3′-proximal ORFs. According to the prevailing model for transcription, leader–body fusion occurs during the 3′-discontinuous extension of subgenomic negative-sense RNAs through a template switch of the replication-transcription complex from 3′-end TRSs to the leader TRS on the genome template (Zuniga *et al.,* 2004, Sola *et al.,* 2005). Transcription template-switch resembles homology-assisted RNA recombination (Smits *et al.,* 2005). This process is driven by sequence complementarity between the anti-TRS at the 3′-end of the nascent negative-sense RNA and the 5′-leader TRS (Figure 4 *Coronaviridae*) (Malone *et al.,* 2022). Subgenomic negative-sense RNAs are the templates for the “continuous” RNA synthesis of positive-sense subgenomic mRNAs (Sawicki and Sawicki 2005).

Regulation of template switching is complex, and may involve viral RNA, viral proteins and host factors. Nucleocapsid phosphorylation by host glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) contributes to template switching, which allows the recruitment of the RNA helicase DDX1 to the phosphorylated-N-containing complex and hence promotes TRS read through of body TRSs to produce longer RNA species in the orthocoronavirus MHV (Wu *et al.,* 2014). In the orthocoronavirus SARS-CoV-2, three DDX DEAD-box RNA helicases are required for viral RNA synthesis, and a fourth restricts virus growth (Ariumi 2022). However, a recent study has shown that the channel formed by the Ubl1 domains of nsp3 monomers on the cytoplasmic surface of the double-membrane vesicle (DMV) is too narrow for passage of viral nucleocapsid or free N protein dimers, suggesting that the N proteins are located on the opposite side of the DMV where viral RNA synthesis takes place (Koetzner *et al.,* 2022). Hence, N protein may not be able to interact directly with the enzymatic components of RNA synthesis. It is proposed that N protein is involved in RNA synthesis by allowing gRNA to enter the DMV while its RNA chaperone activity may play a role in maintaining the long gRNA in a disentangled state which can thread through the channel pore (Zuniga *et al.,* 2010, Koetzner *et al.,* 2022).

Mutagenic studies have shown that exonuclease activity of nsp14 is required to promote fidelity by mediating proofreading during genome replication (Eckerle *et al.,* 2007). The fidelity of murine hepatitis virus replication is decreased in nsp14 exoribonuclease mutants (Eckerle *et al.,* 2007, Eckerle *et al.,* 2010). Infidelity of SARS-CoV nsp14-exonuclease mutant virus replication is revealed by complete genome sequencing (Eckerle *et al.,* 2010). An additional nsp14 function in discontinuous synthesis of subgenomic RNAs has been reported (Ogando *et al.,* 2020, Gribble *et al.,* 2021). It remains to be confirmed that coronavirus-encoded papain-like proteases are essential for subgenomic RNA synthesis, as has been shown for members of the nidoviral family *Arteriviridae* (Tijms *et al.,* 2001).

|  |
| --- |
| Coronaviridae: gene expression |
| **Figure 4.*****Coronaviridae**.* Orthocoronavirus mRNA synthesis: the discontinuous 3′-extension model. Negative-sense RNA synthesis initiates at the 3′-end of the genome and proceeds until a TRS is copied (1). The nascent negative-sense RNA may then be transferred to the 5′-end of the genome (2). Base complementarity allows the negative-sense RNA to anneal to the leader TRS (3) after which RNA synthesis resumes and body (in blue) and leader sequences (in red) become fused (4). The chimeric sg negative-sense RNA in turn serves as a template for “continuous” synthesis of sg mRNAs (5). |

A predicted −1 ribosomal frameshift signal is found in the letovirus genome (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018) comprising a slippery sequence followed immediately by a UAA stop codon at the end of polyprotein 1a (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). A predicted stem-loop conformation (potentially an RNA pseudoknot) is also found in the letovirus genome, suggesting possible ribosomal frameshifting event but further biological characterization is needed (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

Information about the pironavirus genome is limited to a single assembly of 36 652 nucleotides.

## Biology

The family *Coronaviridae* includes three sub-families, *Orthocoronavirinae, Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae.* Orthocoronaviruses infect a wide range of animals, including birds and mammals, while letoviruses and pironaviruses are only reported to infect frogs and fish respectively (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018, Mordecai *et al.,* 2019). The transmission routes for orthocoronaviruses are mainly through contact of contaminated surfaces or objects, fomites, respiratory aerosols/droplets and fecal–oral means, but are unknown for letoviruses and pironaviruses (Drosten *et al.,* 2014, Richard *et al.,* 2020, Smith *et al.,* 2020). Members of the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae* display diverse receptor usage (Table 3.*Coronaviridae*) and pathogenicity in different hosts, ranging from infections being asymptomatic to causing death. Some members of the subfamily have been responsible for well-known human epidemics or pandemics such as SARS, MERS and COVID-19 (Ksiazek *et al.,* 2003, Peiris *et al.,* 2003, Zaki *et al.,* 2012, Zhu *et al.,* 2020).

**Table 3.*****Coronaviridae***Orthocoronavirus primary attachment factors and receptors\*

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Virus genus/species** | **Characteristics of members of the species** | | | **Reference** |
| **Host** | **Attachment factor** | **Main receptor** |
| ***Genus Alphacoronavirus*** |  |  |  |  |
| *Alphacoronavirus suis* | Dog, cat and pig | Sialic acid | APN | (Delmas *et al.,* 1992, Sanchez *et al.,* 2019) |
| *Alphacoronavirus chicagoense* | Human | - | APN | (Yeager *et al.,* 1992) |
| *Alphacoronavirus amsterdamense* | Human | - | ACE2 | (Hofmann *et al.,* 2005, Pohlmann *et al.,* 2006, Smith *et al.,* 2006, Mathewson *et al.,* 2008, Dijkman *et al.,* 2012a) |
| *Alphacoronavirus porci* | Pig | Sialic acid | APN | (Liu *et al.,* 2015) |
| ***Genus Betacoronaviru*****s** |  |  |  |  |
| *Betacoronavirus gravedinis* | Human, cow, horse and pig | - | 9-O-Ac Sia | (Hulswit *et al.,* 2019, Tortorici *et al.,* 2019) |
| *Betacoronavirus hongkongense* | Human | - | 9-O-Ac Sia | (Huang *et al.,* 2015, Hulswit *et al.,* 2019) |
| *Betacoronavirus muris*\*\* | Mouse | 4-O- or 9-O-Ac Sia | CEACAM1a | (Williams *et al.,* 1991, Langereis *et al.,* 2010, Langereis *et al.,* 2012) |
| *Betacoronavirus pandemicum*\*\*\* | Human and diverse mammals | - | ACE2 | (Li *et al.,* 2005a, Mathewson *et al.,* 2008, Ge *et al.,* 2013, Letko *et al.,* 2020) |
| *Betacoronavirus cameli*\*\*\*\* | Human and camel | GRP78, α2,3-sialic acid | DPP4 | (Raj *et al.,* 2013, Li *et al.,* 2017, Chu *et al.,* 2018, Widagdo *et al.,* 2019) |
| *Betacoronavirus tylonycteridis* | Bat | - | DPP4 | (Yang *et al.,* 2014b, Lau *et al.,* 2021) |
| *Betacoronavirus rousetti* | Bat | GRP78 | - | (Chu *et al.,* 2018) |
| ***Deltacoronaviru*****s** |  |  |  |  |
| *Deltacoronavirus suis* | Pig | Sialic acid | APN | (Wang *et al.,* 2018, Zhu *et al.,* 2018) |
| ***Gammacoronaviru*****s** |  |  |  |  |
| *Gammacoronavirus galli* | Poultry | Sialic acid | - | (Winter *et al.,* 2006) |

Abbreviations: APN, aminopeptidase N; ACE2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; CEACAM1a, carcinoembryonic antigen adhesion molecule 1; DPP4, dipeptidyl peptidase-4; GRP78, 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein.

\*Attachment factors and receptors are virus strain-specific.

\*\* Murine coronaviruses occur in two types that use either 4- or 9-*O*-acetylated sialic acid (*O*-Ac Sia) as primary attachment factor and CEACAM1a as main receptor.

\*\*\* Only certain strains can utilize ACE2 as receptor.

\*\*\*\* Only certain strains can utilize DPP4 as receptor.

Orthocoronaviruses can infect a wide range of birds and mammals and include several pathogens of clinical, veterinary and economic importance (Woo *et al.,* 2009a). Transmission occurs via fomites, respiratory or fecal–oral routes; vector-borne transmission has not been described to date (Zhang *et al.,* 2020, Guo *et al.,* 2021). As orthocoronaviruses primarily target epithelial cells, they are generally associated with gastrointestinal and respiratory infections that may be acute or become chronic with prolonged shedding of virus (Sims *et al.,* 2005, van Kampen *et al.,* 2021). In general, these infections are mild and often asymptomatic. Some orthocoronaviruses, however, cause severe, even lethal disease (Rockx *et al.,* 2020). Murine coronaviruses in the genus *Betacoronavirus* cause hepatitis and severe neurologic disease, resulting in encephalitis, so providing a rodent model for the study of the neuropathogenesis of human multiple sclerosis (Fleming *et al.,* 1987). Some members of the species *Alphacoronavirus suis* cause fatal immune-mediated systemic infections in their respective hosts, presumably through the infection of cells of the macrophage/monocyte lineage, with widespread inflammatory lesions in multiple organs (Haake *et al.,* 2020).

Nine coronaviruses that infect humans have been identified so far, and four of them, human coronaviruses (HCoV)-OC43, HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-HKU1, mostly cause common colds and have long been considered of modest clinical importance (van der Hoek *et al.,* 2004, Woo *et al.,* 2006b, Gaunt *et al.,* 2010, Cui *et al.,* 2019, Vlasova *et al.,* 2022). However, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E may also cause severe lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) in infants and the elderly, and have been reported to be responsible for about 5% of infant hospitalizations from LRTI, globally (Monto and Lim 1974, Principi *et al.,* 2010). HCoV-NL63 is considered an important cause of croup in children (van der Hoek *et al.,* 2005). Comparatively, HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-OC43 infections occur more frequently in early childhood than HCoV-HKU1 or HCoV-229E (van der Hoek *et al.,* 2010, Dijkman *et al.,* 2012b). Zoonotic transmission was observed for HCoV-OC43 (from cattle to humans) and potentially for HCoV-229E, with a proposed transmission route from bats to humans via camels (Vijgen *et al.,* 2005, Corman *et al.,* 2015, Tao *et al.,* 2017).

In 2002–2003, SARS-CoV caused an epidemic in human populations of a severe pulmonary disease with a mortality rate of 10%. SARS-CoV rapidly spread to four continents, infecting 8096 individuals and claiming 774 deaths before it was contained. Epidemiological evidence indicates that this virus originated in bats, spread to Himalayan palm civets, Chinese ferret badgers and raccoon dogs that were being sold at the wet markets of Guangdong, China. They then entered the human population through handling or consumption of these species (Zhao 2007, Ge *et al.,* 2013). Although SARS has since vanished, the episode does underline the pathogenic potential of coronaviruses and the possibility of novel emerging coronavirus infections arising from cross-species transmissions. In the wake of the SARS epidemic, molecular surveillance and virus discovery studies have yielded evidence for hundreds of novel coronaviruses, among which a study in 2007 identified several viruses in a new genus, *Deltacoronavirus* infecting various avian hosts (Woo *et al.,* 2007, Woo *et al.,* 2012).

In 2012, a novel coronavirus, Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), caused another epidemic in human populations with a mortality rate of 35% (Zaki *et al.,* 2012). This virus emerged in the Middle East and spread to other regions and countries, leading to isolated infections and occasionally outbreaks of moderate size in hospitals (Drosten *et al.,* 2015, Hui *et al.,* 2015, Kim *et al.,* 2017). Epidemiological studies indicated a polyphyletic origin of MERS-CoV (arising from multiple ancestral sources), suggesting multiple cross-species jumping events from dromedaries (Sabir *et al.,* 2016). The ultimate host origin of MERS-CoV is also believed to be bats (Annan *et al.,* 2013, Wang *et al.,* 2014c, Yang *et al.,* 2014a, Yang *et al.,* 2014b). Unlike SARS, the MERS epidemic is still on-going in the Middle East region.

In late 2019, another outbreak of pneumonia, named COVID-19, emerged from Wuhan, China and spread rapidly to every corner of the world, causing millions of deaths. The cause of this pandemic is a coronavirus closely related to SARS-CoV, named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (*Coronaviridae* Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 2020). The high mutation rate of orthocoronaviruses, the global scale of the pandemic as well as the involvement of immunologically compromised patients during infections have led to the rapid emergence of novel variants of concern. In 2022, the omicron strain, with higher infectivity but lower pathogenicity compared to the original strain, led to another wave of SARS-CoV-2 infections globally (Nyberg *et al.,* 2022). So far, no definite evidence for the involvement of specific intermediate animal hosts in the origin of SARS-CoV-2 has been identified even though several plausible candidates have been proposed (V'Kovski *et al.,* 2021, Wacharapluesadee *et al.,* 2021, Worobey *et al.,* 2022).

Bats harbor an exceptionally wide diversity of orthocoronaviruses and have been proposed to play a vital role in orthocoronavirus ecology and evolution, maybe even as the original hosts from which many if not all alphacornavirus and betacoronavirus lineages derive (Tang *et al.,* 2006, Woo *et al.,* 2006a, Lin *et al.,* 2017, Banerjee *et al.,* 2019). Bat population densities and their roosting and migration habits would all favor such a role and it is possible that more detailed surveillance of bats may identify precursors of many human coronaviruses. Equally, surveillance of other potential host species is needed before final conclusions can be drawn.

The only known member of the subfamily *Letovirinae*, is Microhyla letovirus (MLeV), which was detected in ornamented pygmy frogs (*Microhyla fissipes*) (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018). Mapping single sequence reads onto the viral genome suggests a strong host age-dependence of MLeV detection. The number of fragments per kb of transcript per million mapped reads decreased by seven-fold from host pre-metamorphosis to metamorphic climax and it further decreased by fourteen-fold from host metamorphic climax to completion of metamorphosis (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

Pacific salmon nidovirus (PsNV) (species: *Alphapironavirus salmonis*), the only member of the subfamily *Pitovirinae*, is found in salmon (Mordecai *et al.,* 2019). In hatchery fish, infection by PsNV is primarily localized to gill tissue (Mordecai *et al.,* 2019). It proliferates while fish are undergoing smoltification, a biological process by which the gill tissue undergoes cellular reconfiguration to prepare for salt water (Mordecai *et al.,* 2019). Branchial proliferation with unknown cause is also reported in some farmed salmon infected with PsNV (Mordecai *et al.,* 2019).

#### Antigenicity

For orthocoronaviruses, cross-reactivity is found only among members of closely-related species within the same genus (Wang *et al.,* 2021, Reincke *et al.,* 2022). Several viral proteins, including S, M, N and HE are immunogenic or relevant to serodiagnosis (Huang *et al.,* 2004, Thompson *et al.,* 2020). The S and HE proteins are highly diverse, suggesting extensive antigenic drift through genetic recombination or mutation (Lau *et al.,* 2012).

The S protein is the major inducer of virus-neutralizing antibodies, these being elicited mainly by epitopes in the amino-terminal half of the molecule (Du *et al.,* 2009, Mou *et al.,* 2013, Kim *et al.,* 2014). The surface-exposed amino-terminus of the MHV M protein induces antibodies that neutralize virus infectivity in the presence of complement, while the HE protein of embecoviruses induces antibodies that prevent virions binding to *O*-acetylated sialic acids or inhibit sialate-*O*-acetylesterase activity (Fleming *et al.,* 1989, Lin *et al.,* 2001). The N protein is a dominant antigen during natural infections, and while N-specific antibodies may provide little immune protection, they are of serodiagnostic relevance (Tan *et al.,* 2004, Edridge *et al.,* 2020).

There is also evidence for antigenic shift through RNA recombination in coronaviruses as there are several examples of intra- and possibly inter-species exchange of coding sequences of S (for members of the species *Gammacoronavirus galli*, *Betacoronavirus muris* and *Alphacoronavirus suis*) and HE ectodomains (for members of the species *Betacoronavirus muris*), sometimes with as yet unidentified coronaviruses serving as donors (Su *et al.,* 2016). Studies performed with murine and feline coronaviruses indicate that both structural and non-structural (replicase) proteins are recognized by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (Williamson and Stohlman 1990, de Groot-Mijnes *et al.,* 2005).

Similar to other coronaviruses, the S1 subunits of the members from the sarbecovirus subgenus are more diverse than the S2 subunits. Only some of the members, including SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, utilize ACE2 as the receptor for host cell entry. Animal experiments show that mice immunized with SARS-CoV S can produce neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 S, suggesting that immunity against one member of the subgenus *Sarbecovirus* may offer cross protection against other viruses in the subgenus (Walls *et al.,* 2020). The S2 subunits of the S glycoprotein in SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 are about 88% identical in amino acid sequence. The conformational conserved fusion regions suggest the antibodies targeting this functional motif might have the ability to cross-react and neutralize both viral strains (Walls *et al.,* 2020).

There is evidence that SARS-CoV-2 variants emerging during the pandemic carry different S amino acid mutations that affect host receptor binding affinity as well as the efficacy of antibody neutralization by post vaccination serum. Studies also hypothesize that treatment of immunocompromised individuals with convalescent plasma and monoclonal antibodies might have led to the emergence of heavily mutated variants like B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 by exerting selective pressure on the S protein, especially at the receptor binding motif and N-terminal domain (NTD) (Harvey *et al.,* 2021).

The extent of serologic cross-reactivity between orthocoronaviruses, letoviruses and pironaviruses is unknown.

Subfamily, genus, subgenus and species demarcation criteria

The taxonomic framework is based upon viruses for which a complete genome sequence is available or else a nearly complete genome that includes the 3CLpro, NiRAN, RdRP, ZBD and HEL1 domains (Ziebuhr *et al.,* 2018, Gorbalenya *et al.,* 2021). Genome sequences are analyzed using the computational framework DEmARC (DivErsity pArtitioning by hieRarchical Clustering), an approach which has been applied to the taxonomy of all nidoviruses (Lauber and Gorbalenya 2012). The analysis involves profiles of multiple sequence alignments (MSA) of 3CLpro, NiRAN, RdRP, ZBD and HEL1 domains made using Bayesian and Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees, with profiles of the clustering cost (CC) function produced for weighted hierarchical clusterings of pairwise patristic distances (PPD). The family, subfamily, genus, subgenus and species demarcation thresholds are set as a range of PUD values (% of different amino acid residues in compared proteins, Table 4 *Coronaviridae*), which are deduced from PPD values for which the number of taxa clusters remained constant.

**Table 4** ***Coronaviridae*** Demarcation thresholds for five ranks of the order *Nidovirales* for vertebrate viruses (Ziebuhr *et al.,* 2018, Gorbalenya *et al.,* 2021)

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Rank** | **Number of taxa** | **Threshold** | | **Support** |
| **Year 2021** | **PPD1** | **PUD2** | **CC3** |
| **Family** | 7 | 2.580-3.468 | 0.606-0.681 | 0 |
| **Subfamily** | 14 | 1.472-1.757 | 0.468-0.510 | 0.005025 |
| **Genus** | 25 | 0.873-0.909 | 0.351-0.360 | 0.007678 |
| **Subgenus** | 54 | 0.200-0.221 | 0.132-0.142 | 0.005541 |
| **Species** | 86 | 0.095 | 0.075 | 0.010339 |

**1**Demarcation threshold depicted as a range of PPD values for which number of clusters (taxa) remained constant. PPD values account for repeated replacements of amino acid residues and may exceed 1.

**2**Demarcation threshold depicted as a range of PUD values, deduced from PPD values for which the number of clusters (taxa) remained constant. PUD values were calculated as the % of different residues in the compared proteins.

3CC value of the respective PPD threshold. It was selected for each rank to preserve the already established taxa at the respective rank. For the family and subfamily ranks, the depicted CC corresponds also to local minima of the CC distribution indicating that these selections are also the best possible. For the species, subgenus and genus ranks, the selected CC are in the vicinity of local minima. If the actual local minima had been selected, one or two established taxa would have been revised at each of these ranks.

Corresponding taxonomic proposal(s): 2021.005S.R.Nidovirales

## Derivation of names

*Alphacoronavirus, Betacoronavirus, Deltacoronavirus* and *Gammacoronavirus*: genus names refer to phylogroups 1 to 4 respectively in the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae*, the prefixes corresponding to the first four Greek letters.

*Coronaviridae*: from Latin *corona*, meaning “halo” which refers to the characteristic appearance of virion surface projections that create an image reminiscent of the solar corona (Almeida *et al.,* 1968).

*Letovirinae*: from Leto, in Greek mythology the daughter of the titans Coeus and Phoebe, who turned some inhospitable peasants into frogs; the name refers to frogs as the host source of this virus (Bukhari *et al.,* 2018).

*Orthocoronavirinae*: from Greek ὀρθός (orthós) meaning straight; *Coronavirinae* is derived from the established name of this group of viruses (coronaviruses).

*Pironavirus:* origin obscure. Names of species and subgenus taxa in the single new genus allude to the names of the first reported virus in those taxa.

*Pitovirinae*: origin obscure.

Subgenus names are generally formed from a unique part derived from a host or virus name, followed by the first one or two letters of the genus name (family name for *Milecovirus*)and ending with ‘covirus’ (‘ovirus’ for *Samovirus*) (de Groot *et al.,* 2008, Brinton *et al.,* 2018, Gorbalenya *et al.,* 2021).

## Relationships within the family

Members of the family *Coronaviridae* have been assigned to three sub-families, *Orthocoronavirinae*, *Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae*, on the basis of rooted phylogeny and pair-wise comparisons of *Nidovirales*-wide conserved replicase domains. Within the *Orthocoronavirinae*, four well-separated monophyletic clusters can be distinguished using a rooted maximum-likelihood tree generated from amino acid sequence alignments of (a) RdRP and (b) helicase domains. Microhyla letovirus 1 was used as an outgroup. These clusters correspond to the genera *Alphacoronavirus*, *Betacoronavirus*, *Deltacoronavirus* and *Gammacoronavirus* (Figure 5A *Coronaviridae* and Figure 5B *Coronaviridae*). Orthocoronaviruses have been detected in diverse mammalian and avian animals. Two divergent viruses detected respectively in frogs and fish are classified in single species in the sub-families *Letovirinae* and *Pitovirinae*.

|  |
| --- |
| Coronaviridae phylogeny |
| **Figure 5** ***Coronaviridae.***Phylogenetic relationships among members of the family *Coronaviridae*. A rooted maximum-likelihood tree was generated from amino acid sequence alignments of (A) RdRP and (B) helicase domains. Microhyla letovirus 1 was used as an outgroup. The tree reveals four main monophyletic clusters corresponding to the genera *Alphacoronavirus*, *Beta*coronavirus, *Deltacoronavirus* and *Gammacoronavirus* within the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae.* The assignment of viruses to taxa is based upon previous taxonomic proposals (Ziebuhr *et al.,* 2018, Gorbalenya *et al.,* 2021). |

## Relationships with other taxa

Based on the ML phylogenetic trees constructed using multiple sequence alignments of five concatenated domains in the replicase region (3CLpro, NiRAN, RdRP, ZBD and HEL1) of members of the order *Nidovirales*, members of the family *Coronaviridae* are most closely related to members of the family *Tobaniviridae* that have vertebrate hosts and were previously included in the family *Coronaviridae* (Zhou *et al.,* 2021). The family *Coronaviridae* consistently forms a monophyletic cluster that is separate from other nidoviral families including the *Arteriviridae*, *Tobaniviridae* and *Roniviridae*. Similarities in genomic organization, sequences of conserved replicase proteins, structural proteins and the subgenomic mRNA transcription strategy suggest a close relationship between members of the family *Coronaviridae* with other members of the order *Nidovirales*.

## Related, unclassified viruses

There are recent reports of coronavirus-like sequences from two more vertebrate classes; a divergent lineage in jawless fish (Miller *et al.,* 2021) and a partial orthocoronavirus-like genome from a reptile (Shi *et al.,* 2018), both of which have yet to be formally reviewed by the ICTV.

---


## Subfamily: Letovirinae

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Family: *Coronaviridae*

## Subfamily: *Letovirinae*

## Distinguishing features

The subfamily *Letovirinae* was established for Microhyla letovirus 1 (Figure 1 *Letovirinae*) based on DEmARC analysis of the nidovirus-wide conserved 3CLpro, NiRAN, RdRP, ZBH and HEL1 domains.

|  |
| --- |
| Letovirinae genome |
| **Figure 1** ***Letovirinae.*** Letovirus genome organization. 3′-terminal ORFs downstream of ORF1b are depicted as coloured boxes with red, S; cyan, E; yellow, M and magenta, N. ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

## Genus demarcation criteria

There is only one genus in the subfamily. Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Genus: Alphaletovirus

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Subfamily: *Letovirinae*

## Genus: *Alphaletovirus*

## Distinguishing features

As only one genus is currently recognized, the genus description corresponds to the subfamily description.

## Subgenus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

## Species demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Family: *Coronaviridae*

## Subfamily: *Orthocoronavirinae*

## Distinguishing features

The subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae* was established for four genera based upon DEmARC analysis of the nidovirus-wide conserved 3CLpro, NiRAN, RdRP, ZBD and HEL1 domains. This subfamily consists of a large clade with 4 distinct branches in phylogenetic trees (Figure 5 *Coronaviridae*), these corresponding to the genera *Alphacoronavirus*, *Betacoronavirus*, *Deltacoronavirus* and *Gammacoronavirus*. Members of this subfamily can infect a wide range of mammals and birds.

## Genus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Genus: Alphacoronavirus

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Subfamily: *Orthocoronavirinae*

## Genus: *Alphacoronavirus*

## Distinguishing features

Alphacoronaviruses form a distinct monophyletic group within the *Orthocoronavirinae* subfamily. They also have (i) a unique nsp1, distinct in size and sequence from the nsp1 of betacoronaviruses and without an apparent counterpart in either deltacoronaviruses or gammacoronaviruses (Connor and Roper 2007), and (ii) an accessory gene (designated ORF3 in most alphacoronavirus species, ORF3b in transmissible gastroenteritis virus and ORF3c in feline coronavirus/canine coronavirus) for a dispensable multi-spanning alphacoronavirus membrane protein (αmp) (Muller *et al.,* 2010, Vlasova *et al.,* 2011). For some alphacorona­viruses, αmp is the only accessory protein, but other alphacoronavirus genomes encode up to six accessory genes (e.g. certain coronaviruses in the species *Alphacoronavirus suis*) (Figure 1 *Alphacoronavirus*).

|  |
| --- |
| Alphacoronavirus genomes |
| **Figure 1**.*Alphacoronavirus.* Alphacoronavirus genome organization. Comparison of the 3′-terminal genomic regions downstream of ORF1b of alphacoronavirus representatives for members of different subgenera. ORFs are depicted as coloured boxes with red, S; blue, E; yellow, M and purple, N. ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

## Biology

Alphacoronaviruses have been detected in a wide range of mammals. Members of the subgenera *Colacovirus*, *Decacovirus*, *Duvinacovirus*, *Minuacovirus*, *Myotacovirus*, *Nyctacovirus*, *Pedacovirus*, *Rhinacovirus* and *Setracovirus* are able to infect bats, while members of the subgenera *Pedacovirus* and *Rhinacovirus* can also cause enteric diseases in pigs (Pensaert and de Bouck 1978, Lau *et al.,* 2007, Zhou *et al.,* 2018). Two human coronaviruses are assigned to this genus, human coronavirus 229E and human coronavirus NL63, which belong to the subgenera *Duvinacovirus* and *Setracovirus* respectively (Tyrrell and Bynoe 1965, van der Hoek *et al.,* 2004, Farsani *et al.,* 2012). Lucheng Rn rat coronavirus (subgenus *Luchacovirus*), was discovered in brown rats (Wang *et al.,* 2015). Mink coronavirus (subgenus *Minacovirus*), was found in the American mink (*Mustela vison*) (Vlasova *et al.,* 2011). Common shrew coronavirus Tibet-2014 (subgenus *Soracovirus*) was found in common shrews (Wu *et al.,* 2018). Suncus murinus coronavirus Xingguo-74 (subgenus *Sunacovirus*) was found in the Asian house shrew. In the subgenus *Tegacovirus*, members of the species *Alphacoronavirus suis* infect multiple mammalian hosts, including dogs, cats and pigs (Whittaker *et al.,* 2018).

## Subgenus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

## Species demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Genus: Betacoronavirus

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Subfamily: *Orthocoronavirinae*

## Genus: *Betacoronavirus*

## Distinguishing features

Betacoronaviruses form a distinct monophyletic group in the *Orthocoronavirinae* subfamily. Their nsp1 is distinct in size and sequence from the alphacoronavirus nsp1 and has no obvious counterpart in either deltacoronaviruses or gammacoronaviruses. Various sets of accessory genes are observed in different members (Figure 1 *Betacoronavirus*). Several betacoronaviruses infect humans with high transmissibility and/or fatality rate, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) and Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (Drosten *et al.,* 2003, Ksiazek *et al.,* 2003, van Boheemen *et al.,* 2012, Zaki *et al.,* 2012, Zhu *et al.,* 2020). Similar to alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses can infect a wide range of mammals.

|  |
| --- |
| Betacoronavirus genomes |
| **Figure 1** ***Betacoronavirus.*** Betacoronavirus genome organization. Comparison of the 3′-terminal genomic regions downstream of ORF1b of betacoronaviruses representative of different subgenera. ORFs are depicted as coloured boxes with green, HE; red, S; cyan, E; yellow, M and magenta, N. ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

## Virion

#### Proteins

The unique hemagglutinin-esterase protein found in members of the subgenus *Embecovirus* can serve as a lectin and a receptor-destroying enzyme (de Groot 2006, Lang *et al.,* 2020). This protein is capable of reversible attachment to *O*-acetylated sialic acid and hence can prevent the loss of infectivity due to off-target receptor binding (Zeng *et al.,* 2008). Loss of hemagglutinin-esterase lectin function is observed in both human coronavirus OC43 and human coronavirus HKU1 (Bakkers *et al.,* 2017).

## Genome organization and replication

Members of subgenus *Embecovirus* contain a hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) gene, located between ORF1 and *S* genes. It is exclusively found in embecoviruses, suggesting possible heterologous recombination between the ancestor of embecoviruses and influenza C virus (family *Orthomyxoviridae*) (de Groot 2006, Zeng *et al.,* 2008).

Bat Hp-betacoronavirus Zhejiang2013, found in the bat *Hipposideros pratti*, is the only member of the subgenus *Hibecovirus* (Wu *et al.,* 2016a) and has an additional ORF2 located downstream of ORF1 and upstream of the *S* gene that is not found in other members of the genus *Betacoronavirus*. Detailed molecular characterization of this virus has yet to be done.

## Biology

Similar to alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses have diverse mammalian hosts. For the subgenus *Embecovirus*, members of the species *Betacoronavirus gravedinis* and *Betacoronavirus ratti* have been identified from rat (*Rattus norvegicus*), *Betacoronavirus muris* from mice, *Betacoronavirus myodae* from rodents and *Betacoronavirus hongkongense* from humans (Cheever *et al.,* 1949, Woo *et al.,* 2005, Lau *et al.,* 2014, Wu *et al.,* 2018). Cross-species jumping has been observed for members of the species *Betacoronavirus gravedinis* as these have been found in multiple mammalian hosts, including sable antelopes, bovines, waterbucks, dogs, white-tailed deer, dromedary camels, pigs and humans (Woo *et al.,* 2014, Bakkers *et al.,* 2017). Notably, no embecoviruses have been discovered in bats, suggesting that a rodent-related coronavirus may be the origin of this subgenus. Bats are the only host for members of the subgenera *Hibecovirus* and *Nobecovirus*. Merbecoviruses have been identified in bats, hedgehogs, camels and humans (Woo *et al.,* 2007, Corman *et al.,* 2014, Haagmans *et al.,* 2014, Raj *et al.,* 2014, Lau *et al.,* 2018b, Lau *et al.,* 2019), including Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus, the etiological agent of the on-going MERS epidemic (Zaki *et al.,* 2012, de Groot *et al.,* 2013). The subgenus *Sarbecovirus* includes two pathogenic viruses, SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, responsible for the SARS epidemic in 2003 and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic respectively (Drosten *et al.,* 2003, Ksiazek *et al.,* 2003, Zhu *et al.,* 2020). SARS-CoV is able to infect humans, bats and palm civets (Lau *et al.,* 2005, Li *et al.,* 2005b). SARS-CoV-2 has a much wider host tropism than SARS-CoV (Nyberg *et al.,* 2022) and has been found in bats, pangolins, cats, tigers, lions, snow leopards, cougars, pumas, ferrets, otters, gorillas, dogs, mice, hamsters, rabbits and mink. Most of these hosts are considered as inefficient or dead-end infections, except for the bi-directional transmission between mink/hamsters and humans (Wong *et al.,* 2021, Yen *et al.,* 2022).

## Subgenus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

## Species demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Genus: Deltacoronavirus

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Subfamily: *Orthocoronavirinae*

## Genus: *Deltacoronavirus*

## Distinguishing features

Deltacoronaviruses form a distinct monophyletic group in the *Orthocoronavirinae* subfamily and differ from other coronaviruses in lacking an nsp1 gene in ORF1a (Figure 1 *Deltacoronoavirus*). Three deltacoronavirus subgenera can be distinguished, namely *Andecovirus*, *Buldecovirus* and *Herdecovirus*. Various sets of accessory genes are observed in members of different subgenera members (Figure 1 *Deltacoronavirus*). Most deltacoronaviruses have been found in birds, the only exception being porcine coronavirus HKU15, previously known as porcine deltacoronavirus, which is found in pigs and occasionally in humans (Lednicky *et al.,* 2021).

|  |
| --- |
| Deltacoronavirus genomes |
| **Figure 1** ***Deltacoronavirus***. Deltacoronavirus genome organization. Comparison of the 3′-terminal genomic regions downstream of ORF1b of representatives of each subgenus. ORFs are depicted as coloured boxes with red, S; cyan, E; yellow, M and magenta, N. ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

## Biology

Unlike alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses, deltacoronaviruses have usually been discovered in diverse avian hosts (Woo *et al.,* 2009b); wigeon coronavirus HKU20 (subgenus *Andecovirus*) was identified in wigeon (Woo *et al.,* 2012), various members of the subgenus *Buldecovirus* have been discovered in bulbul, common moorhen, munia and white-eye (Lau *et al.,* 2018a), and night heron coronavirus HKU19 (subgenus *Herdecovirus*) was discovered in night herons (Woo *et al.,* 2012). The only non-avian member of the genus is porcine coronavirus HKU15 (subgenus *Buldecovirus*, species *Deltacoronavirus suis*) (Woo *et al.,* 2012). This virus has been widely detected in pigs from regions including East/Southeast Asia, North America, etc. and is responsible for outbreaks of respiratory and enteric disease in pig farms (Wang *et al.,* 2014a, Wang *et al.,* 2014b, Dong *et al.,* 2015, Janetanakit *et al.,* 2016, Lee *et al.,* 2016, Madapong *et al.,* 2016, Saeng-Chuto *et al.,* 2017, Le *et al.,* 2018). This virus is spread through both the respiratory and faecal-oral routes. Human isolates of *Deltacoronavirus suis* (human porcine deltacoronavirus [HuPDCoV]), have been found in three Haitian children with transient mild fever, cough or abdominal pain (Lednicky *et al.,* 2021).

## Subgenus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

## Species demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Genus: Gammacoronavirus

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Subfamily: *Orthocoronavirinae*

## Genus: *Gammacoronavirus*

## Distinguishing features

Gammacoronaviruses form a distinct monophyletic group in the subfamily *Orthocoronavirinae* and lack an nsp1 domain in ORF1a (Figure 1 *Gammacoronavirus*). Three gammacoronavirus subgenera can be distinguished, namely *Brangacovirus*, *Cegacovirus*, and *Igacovirus.* Various sets of accessory genes are observed in members of different subgenera (Figure 1 *Gammacoronavirus*). Most gammacoronaviruses have been found in birds, with the exception of beluga whale coronavirus and bottlenose dolphin coronavirus HKU22 which infect whales and dolphins respectively (Mihindukulasuriya *et al.,* 2008).

|  |
| --- |
| Gammacoronavirus genomes |
| **Figure 1** ***Gammacoronavirus.*** Gammacoronavirus genome organization. Comparison of the 3′-terminal genomic regions downstream of representative members of different gammacoronavirus subgenera. ORFs are depicted as coloured boxes with red, S; cyan, E; yellow, M and magenta, N. ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

## Biology

Similar to deltacoronaviruses, gammacoronaviruses have mostly been discovered in diverse avian hosts. Canada goose-Branta canadensis-coronavirus-Cambridge Bay 2017 (subgenus *Brangacovirus*) was identified in geese (Papineau *et al.,* 2019), while members of three species in the subgenus *Igacovirus* (*Gammacoronavirus galli*, *Gammacoronavirus pulli* and *Gammacoronavirus anatis*) all have avian hosts. Infectious bronchitis virus (IBV), a member of the species *Gammacoronavirus galli*, was the first coronavirus to be discovered (Cunningham and Stuart 1947), and affects the avian respiratory tract, gut, kidney and reproductive systems, leading to economic burden in poultry industry. Beluga whale coronavirus (subgenus *Cegacovirus*), is the first gammacoronavirus to have been discovered in a mammalian host (Mihindukulasuriya *et al.,* 2008). An isolate of this species has also been discovered in bottlenose dolphins (bottlenose dolphin coronavirus HKU22) in which the spike protein sequence is only 74% amino acid identical with that of beluga whale coronavirus. No observable clinical diseases were found in either of these mammalian hosts.

## Subgenus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

## Species demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Subfamily: Pitovirinae

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Family: *Coronaviridae*

## Subfamily: *Pitovirinae*

## Distinguishing features

The subfamily *Pitovirinae* was established for the virus Pacific salmon nidovirus based on its low overall genome sequence identity with other coronaviruses despite conservation of the canonical replicase domains found in other members of the family *Coronaviridae* (Figure 1 *Pitovirinae*)*.*

|  |
| --- |
| Pitovirinae genome |
| **Figure 1** ***Pitovirinae*****.** Pironavirus genome organization. 3′-terminal genomic regions of Pacific salmon nidovirus. ORFs are depicted as coloured boxes with skyblue, lamina-associated polypeptide 1C (LAP1C); red, S; cyan, E; yellow, M and magenta, N. ORFs for accessory proteins are depicted as coloured boxes in grey. |

## Genus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Genus: Alphapironavirus

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Subfamily: *Pitovirinae*

## Genus: *Alphapironavirus*

## Distinguishing features

As only one genus is currently recognized, the genus description corresponds to the subfamily description. The only known host is a fish.

## Subgenus demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

## Species demarcation criteria

Details correspond to the family descriptions.

---


## Authors: Coronaviridae

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Authors: *Coronaviridae*

****Patrick C.Y. Woo\*****  
*Coronaviridae* Study Group Chair  
PhD Program in Translational Medicine and Department of Life Sciences  
National Chung Hsing University  
Taichung 402  
Taiwan  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Raoul J. de Groot****  
Department of Biomolecular Health Sciences  
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine  
Utrecht University  
Utrecht  
The Netherlands  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Bart Haagmans****  
Department of Viroscience  
Erasmus Medical Center  
Rotterdam  
The Netherlands  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Susanna K.P. Lau****  
Department of Microbiology  
School of Clinical Medicine  
Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine  
The University of Hong Kong  
Hong Kong  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Benjamin W. Neuman****  
Department of Biology  
Texas A&M University  
College Station  
Texas, 77843  
United States  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Stanley Perlman****   
Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, and Pediatrics  
University of Iowa  
Iowa City, IA 52242  
United States  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Isabel Sola****  
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology  
National Center for Biotechnology-Spanish  
National Research Council (CNB-CSIC)  
Madrid  
Spain  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Lia van der Hoek****  
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention  
Amsterdam UMC  
Laboratory of Experimental Virology  
Location University of Amsterdam  
1105 AZ Amsterdam  
The Netherlands  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Antonio C.P. Wong****  
Department of Microbiology  
School of Clinical Medicine  
Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine  
The University of Hong Kong  
Hong Kong  
E-mail: [email protected]

****Shiou-Hwei Yeh****  
Department of Microbiology  
College of Medicine  
National Taiwan University  
Taipei  
Taiwan  
E-mail: [email protected]

\* to whom correspondence should be addressed

The chapter in the Ninth ICTV Report, which served as the template for this chapter, was contributed by de Groot, R.J., Baker, S.C., Baric, R., Enjuanes, L., Gorbalenya, A.E., Holmes, K.V., Perlman, S., Poon, L., Rottier, P.J.M., Talbot, P.J., Woo, P.C.Y. and Ziebuhr, J.

---


## Citation: Coronaviridae

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Citation: *Coronaviridae*

A summary of this ICTV Report chapter has been published as an ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile article in the Journal of General Virology, and should be cited when referencing this online chapter as follows:

Woo, P.C.Y., de Groot, R.J., Haagmans, B., Lau, S.K.P., Neuman, B.W., Perlman, S., Sola, I., van der Hoek, L., Wong, A.C.P. and Yeh, S.-H. (2023): ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: *Coronaviridae* 2023, Journal of General Virology (2023), 104, 001843

---


## References: Coronaviridae

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## References: *Coronaviridae*

**Al-Mulla, H. M., L. Turrell, N. M. Smith, L. Payne, S. Baliji, R. Zust, V. Thiel, S. C. Baker, S. G. Siddell and B. W. Neuman** **(2014)**. Competitive fitness in coronaviruses is not correlated with size or number of double-membrane vesicles under reduced-temperature growth conditions. *MBio* **5**: e01107-13. [PubMed]

**Almeida, J., D. Berry, C. C., D. Hamre, M. Hofstad, L. Mallucci, K. McIntosh and D. Tyrrell** **(1968)**. Virology: coronaviruses. *Nature* **220**: 650-.

**Alsaadi, E. A. J., B. W. Neuman and I. M. Jones** **(2019)**. A fusion peptide in the spike protein of MERS coronavirus. *Viruses* **11**: e0825. [PubMed]

**Alsaadi, E. A. J., B. W. Neuman and I. M. Jones** **(2020)**. Identification of a membrane binding peptide in the envelope protein of MHV coronavirus. *Viruses* **12**: e1054. [PubMed]

**Angelini, M. M., M. Akhlaghpour, B. W. Neuman and M. J. Buchmeier** **(2013)**. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nonstructural proteins 3, 4, and 6 induce double-membrane vesicles. *MBio* **4**: e00524-13. [PubMed]

**Annan, A., H. J. Baldwin, V. M. Corman, S. M. Klose, M. Owusu, E. E. Nkrumah, E. K. Badu, P. Anti, O. Agbenyega, B. Meyer, S. Oppong, Y. A. Sarkodie, E. K. Kalko, P. H. Lina, E. V. Godlevska, C. Reusken, A. Seebens, F. Gloza-Rausch, P. Vallo, M. Tschapka, C. Drosten and J. F. Drexler** **(2013)**. Human betacoronavirus 2c EMC/2012-related viruses in bats, Ghana and Europe. *Emerg Infect Dis* **19**: 456-9. [PubMed]

**Ariumi, Y.** **(2022)**. Host cellular RNA helicases regulate SARS-CoV-2 infection. *J Virol* **96**: e0000222. [PubMed]

**Bakkers, M. J., Y. Lang, L. J. Feitsma, R. J. Hulswit, S. A. de Poot, A. L. van Vliet, I. Margine, J. D. de Groot-Mijnes, F. J. van Kuppeveld, M. A. Langereis, E. G. Huizinga and R. J. de Groot** **(2017)**. Betacoronavirus adaptation to humans involved progressive loss of hemagglutinin-esterase lectin activity. *Cell Host Microbe* **21**: 356-66. [PubMed]

**Banerjee, A., K. Kulcsar, V. Misra, M. Frieman and K. Mossman** **(2019)**. Bats and coronaviruses. *Viruses* **11**: e0041. [PubMed]

**Barcena, M., G. T. Oostergetel, W. Bartelink, F. G. Faas, A. Verkleij, P. J. Rottier, A. J. Koster and B. J. Bosch** **(2009)**. Cryo-electron tomography of mouse hepatitis virus: Insights into the structure of the coronavirion. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **106**: 582-7. [PubMed]

**Barnard, D. L.** **(2008)**. Coronaviruses: molecular and cellular biology. *Future Virology* **3**: 119-23. [PubMed]

**Becares, M., A. Pascual-Iglesias, A. Nogales, I. Sola, L. Enjuanes and S. Zuniga** **(2016)**. Mutagenesis of coronavirus nsp14 reveals its potential role in modulation of the innate immune response. *J Virol* **90**: 5399-414. [PubMed]

**Bedell, K., A. H. Buchaklian and S. Perlman** **(2016)**. Efficacy of an automated multiple emitter whole-room ultraviolet-C disinfection system against coronaviruses MHV and MERS-CoV. *Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol* **37**: 598-9. [PubMed]

**Bosch, B. J., R. van der Zee, C. A. de Haan and P. J. Rottier** **(2003)**. The coronavirus spike protein is a class I virus fusion protein: structural and functional characterization of the fusion core complex. *J Virol* **77**: 8801-11. [PubMed]

**Bredenbeek, P. J., C. J. Pachuk, A. F. Noten, J. Charite, W. Luytjes, S. R. Weiss and W. J. Spaan** **(1990)**. The primary structure and expression of the second open reading frame of the polymerase gene of the coronavirus MHV-A59; a highly conserved polymerase is expressed by an efficient ribosomal frameshifting mechanism. *Nucleic Acids Res* **18**: 1825-32. [PubMed]

**Brian, D. A. and R. S. Baric (2005).** Coronavirus genome structure and replication. In *Curr Top Microbiol Immunol*, pp. 1-30: Springer-Verlag.

**Brinton, M. A., A. Gulyaeva, U. B. R. Balasuriya, M. Dunowska, K. S. Faaberg, T. Goldberg, F. C.-C. Leung, H. J. Nauwynck, E. J. Snijder, T. Stadejek and A. E. Gorbalenya (2018**). Expansion of the rank structure of the family *Arteriviridae* and renaming its taxa In. Web address: https://talk.ictvonline.org/ICTV/proposals/2017.001S.012-017S.R.Nidovirales.zip.

**Bukhari, K., G. Mulley, A. A. Gulyaeva, L. Zhao, G. Shu, J. Jiang and B. W. Neuman** **(2018)**. Description and initial characterization of metatranscriptomic nidovirus-like genomes from the proposed new family Abyssoviridae, and from a sister group to the *Coronavirinae*, the proposed genus Alphaletovirus. *Virology* **524**: 160-71. [PubMed]

**Canton, J., A. R. Fehr, R. Fernandez-Delgado, F. J. Gutierrez-Alvarez, M. T. Sanchez-Aparicio, A. Garcia-Sastre, S. Perlman, L. Enjuanes and I. Sola** **(2018)**. MERS-CoV 4b protein interferes with the NF-kappaB-dependent innate immune response during infection. *PLoS Pathog* **14**: e1006838. [PubMed]

**Castano-Rodriguez, C., J. M. Honrubia, J. Gutierrez-Alvarez, M. L. DeDiego, J. L. Nieto-Torres, J. M. Jimenez-Guardeno, J. A. Regla-Nava, R. Fernandez-Delgado, C. Verdia-Baguena, M. Queralt-Martin, G. Kochan, S. Perlman, V. M. Aguilella, I. Sola and L. Enjuanes** **(2018)**. Role of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus viroporins E, 3a, and 8a in replication and pathogenesis. *MBio* **9**: e02325-17. [PubMed]

**Chang, C. K., S. C. Sue, T. H. Yu, C. M. Hsieh, C. K. Tsai, Y. C. Chiang, S. J. Lee, H. H. Hsiao, W. J. Wu, W. L. Chang, C. H. Lin and T. H. Huang** **(2006)**. Modular organization of SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein. *J Biomed Sci* **13**: 59-72. [PubMed]

**Cheever, F. S., J. B. Daniels and et al.** **(1949)**. A murine virus (JHM) causing disseminated encephalomyelitis with extensive destruction of myelin. *J Exp Med* **90**: 181-210. [PubMed]

**Chen, C. Y., C. K. Chang, Y. W. Chang, S. C. Sue, H. I. Bai, L. Riang, C. D. Hsiao and T. H. Huang** **(2007)**. Structure of the SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein RNA-binding dimerization domain suggests a mechanism for helical packaging of viral RNA. *J Mol Biol* **368**: 1075-86. [PubMed]

**Chen, Y., H. Cai, J. Pan, N. Xiang, P. Tien, T. Ahola and D. Guo** **(2009)**. Functional screen reveals SARS coronavirus nonstructural protein nsp14 as a novel cap N7 methyltransferase. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **106**: 3484-9. [PubMed]

**Chen, Y., C. Su, M. Ke, X. Jin, L. Xu, Z. Zhang, A. Wu, Y. Sun, Z. Yang, P. Tien, T. Ahola, Y. Liang, X. Liu and D. Guo** **(2011)**. Biochemical and structural insights into the mechanisms of SARS coronavirus RNA ribose 2'-O-methylation by nsp16/nsp10 protein complex. *PLoS Pathog* **7**: e1002294. [PubMed]

**Chu, H., C. M. Chan, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Yuan, J. Zhou, R. K. Au-Yeung, K. H. Sze, D. Yang, H. Shuai, Y. Hou, C. Li, X. Zhao, V. K. Poon, S. P. Leung, M. L. Yeung, J. Yan, G. Lu, D. Y. Jin, G. F. Gao, J. F. Chan and K. Y. Yuen** **(2018)**. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus and bat coronavirus HKU9 both can utilize GRP78 for attachment onto host cells. *J Biol Chem* **293**: 11709-26. [PubMed]

**Connor, R. F. and R. L. Roper** **(2007)**. Unique SARS-CoV protein nsp1: bioinformatics, biochemistry and potential effects on virulence. *Trends Microbiol* **15**: 51-3. [PubMed]

**Corman, V. M., H. J. Baldwin, A. F. Tateno, R. M. Zerbinati, A. Annan, M. Owusu, E. E. Nkrumah, G. D. Maganga, S. Oppong, Y. Adu-Sarkodie, P. Vallo, L. V. da Silva Filho, E. M. Leroy, V. Thiel, L. van der Hoek, L. L. Poon, M. Tschapka, C. Drosten and J. F. Drexler** **(2015)**. Evidence for an ancestral association of human coronavirus 229E with bats. *J Virol* **89**: 11858-70. [PubMed]

**Corman, V. M., R. Kallies, H. Philipps, G. Gopner, M. A. Muller, I. Eckerle, S. Brunink, C. Drosten and J. F. Drexler** **(2014)**. Characterization of a novel betacoronavirus related to middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus in European hedgehogs. *J Virol* **88**: 717-24. [PubMed]

***Coronaviridae*** **Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses** **(2020)**. The species *Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus*: classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. *Nat Microbiol* **5**: 536-44. [PubMed]

**Corse, E. and C. E. Machamer** **(2002)**. The cytoplasmic tail of infectious bronchitis virus E protein directs Golgi targeting. *J Virol* **76**: 1273-84. [PubMed]

**Cui, J., F. Li and Z. L. Shi** **(2019)**. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. *Nat Rev Microbiol* **17**: 181-92. [PubMed]

**Cunningham, C. H. and H. O. Stuart** **(1947)**. Cultivation of the virus of infectious bronchitis of chickens in embryonated chicken eggs. *Am J Vet Res* **8**: 209-12. [PubMed]

**de Groot-Mijnes, J. D., J. M. van Dun, R. G. van der Most and R. J. de Groot** **(2005)**. Natural history of a recurrent feline coronavirus infection and the role of cellular immunity in survival and disease. *J Virol* **79**: 1036-44. [PubMed]

**de Groot, R. J.** **(2006)**. Structure, function and evolution of the hemagglutinin-esterase proteins of corona- and toroviruses. *Glycoconj J* **23**: 59-72. [PubMed]

**de Groot, R. J., S. C. Baker, R. S. Baric, C. S. Brown, C. Drosten, L. Enjuanes, R. A. Fouchier, M. Galiano, A. E. Gorbalenya, Z. A. Memish, S. Perlman, L. L. Poon, E. J. Snijder, G. M. Stephens, P. C. Woo, A. M. Zaki, M. Zambon and J. Ziebuhr** **(2013)**. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV): announcement of the Coronavirus Study Group. *J Virol* **87**: 7790-2. [PubMed]

**de Groot, R. J., J. Ziebuhr, L. L. Poon, P. C. Woo, P. Talbot, P. J. M. Rottier, K. V. Holmes, R. Baric, S. Perlman, L. Enjuanes and A. E. Gorbalenya (2008**). Revision of the family *Coronaviridae* In. Web address: https://ictv.global/filebrowser/download/1376.

**de Haan, C. A., L. Kuo, P. S. Masters, H. Vennema and P. J. Rottier** **(1998)**. Coronavirus particle assembly: primary structure requirements of the membrane protein. *J Virol* **72**: 6838-50. [PubMed]

**de Haan, C. A. and P. J. Rottier** **(2005)**. Molecular interactions in the assembly of coronaviruses. *Adv Virus Res* **64**: 165-230. [PubMed]

**de Vries, A. A. F., M. C. Horzinek, P. J. M. Rottier and R. J. de Groot** **(1997)**. The genome organization of the *Nidovirales*: similarities and differences between arteri-, toro-, and coronaviruses. *Semin Virol* **8**: 33-47. [PubMed]

**DeDiego, M. L., J. L. Nieto-Torres, J. M. Jimenez-Guardeno, J. A. Regla-Nava, E. Alvarez, J. C. Oliveros, J. Zhao, C. Fett, S. Perlman and L. Enjuanes** **(2011)**. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus envelope protein regulates cell stress response and apoptosis. *PLoS Pathog* **7**: e1002315. [PubMed]

**Delmas, B., J. Gelfi, R. L'Haridon, L. K. Vogel, H. Sjostrom, O. Noren and H. Laude** **(1992)**. Aminopeptidase N is a major receptor for the entero-pathogenic coronavirus TGEV. *Nature* **357**: 417-20. [PubMed]

**Dijkman, R., M. F. Jebbink, M. Deijs, A. Milewska, K. Pyrc, E. Buelow, A. van der Bijl and L. van der Hoek** **(2012a)**. Replication-dependent downregulation of cellular angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protein expression by human coronavirus NL63. *J Gen Virol* **93**: 1924-9. [PubMed]

**Dijkman, R., M. F. Jebbink, E. Gaunt, J. W. Rossen, K. E. Templeton, T. W. Kuijpers and L. van der Hoek** **(2012b)**. The dominance of human coronavirus OC43 and NL63 infections in infants. *J Clin Virol* **53**: 135-9. [PubMed]

**Dong, N., L. Fang, S. Zeng, Q. Sun, H. Chen and S. Xiao** **(2015)**. Porcine deltacoronavirus in mainland China. *Emerg Infect Dis* **21**: 2254-5. [PubMed]

**Doyle, N., B. W. Neuman, J. Simpson, P. C. Hawes, J. Mantell, P. Verkade, H. Alrashedi and H. J. Maier** **(2018)**. Infectious bronchitis virus nonstructural protein 4 alone induces membrane pairing. *Viruses* **10**: e0477. [PubMed]

**Drosten, C., S. Gunther, W. Preiser, S. van der Werf, H. R. Brodt, S. Becker, H. Rabenau, M. Panning, L. Kolesnikova, R. A. Fouchier, A. Berger, A. M. Burguiere, J. Cinatl, M. Eickmann, N. Escriou, K. Grywna, S. Kramme, J. C. Manuguerra, S. Muller, V. Rickerts, M. Sturmer, S. Vieth, H. D. Klenk, A. D. Osterhaus, H. Schmitz and H. W. Doerr** **(2003)**. Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. *New Engl J Med* **348**: 1967-76. [PubMed]

**Drosten, C., B. Meyer, M. A. Muller, V. M. Corman, M. Al-Masri, R. Hossain, H. Madani, A. Sieberg, B. J. Bosch, E. Lattwein, R. F. Alhakeem, A. M. Assiri, W. Hajomar, A. M. Albarrak, J. A. Al-Tawfiq, A. I. Zumla and Z. A. Memish** **(2014)**. Transmission of MERS-coronavirus in household contacts. *New Engl J Med* **371**: 828-35. [PubMed]

**Drosten, C., D. Muth, V. M. Corman, R. Hussain, M. Al Masri, W. HajOmar, O. Landt, A. Assiri, I. Eckerle, A. Al Shangiti, J. A. Al-Tawfiq, A. Albarrak, A. Zumla, A. Rambaut and Z. A. Memish** **(2015)**. An observational, laboratory-based study of outbreaks of middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus in Jeddah and Riyadh, kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2014. *Clin Infect Dis* **60**: 369-77. [PubMed]

**Du, L., Y. He, Y. Zhou, S. Liu, B. J. Zheng and S. Jiang** **(2009)**. The spike protein of SARS-CoV--a target for vaccine and therapeutic development. *Nat Rev Microbiol* **7**: 226-36. [PubMed]

**Dufour, D., P. A. Mateos-Gomez, L. Enjuanes, J. Gallego and I. Sola** **(2011)**. Structure and functional relevance of a transcription-regulating sequence involved in coronavirus discontinuous RNA synthesis. *J Virol* **85**: 4963-73. [PubMed]

**Eckerle, L. D., M. M. Becker, R. A. Halpin, K. Li, E. Venter, X. Lu, S. Scherbakova, R. L. Graham, R. S. Baric, T. B. Stockwell, D. J. Spiro and M. R. Denison** **(2010)**. Infidelity of SARS-CoV Nsp14-exonuclease mutant virus replication is revealed by complete genome sequencing. *PLoS Pathog* **6**: e1000896. [PubMed]

**Eckerle, L. D., X. Lu, S. M. Sperry, L. Choi and M. R. Denison** **(2007)**. High fidelity of murine hepatitis virus replication is decreased in nsp14 exoribonuclease mutants. *J Virol* **81**: 12135-44. [PubMed]

**Edridge, A. W. D., J. Kaczorowska, A. C. R. Hoste, M. Bakker, M. Klein, K. Loens, M. F. Jebbink, A. Matser, C. M. Kinsella, P. Rueda, M. Ieven, H. Goossens, M. Prins, P. Sastre, M. Deijs and L. van der Hoek** **(2020)**. Seasonal coronavirus protective immunity is short-lasting. *Nat Med* **26**: 1691-3. [PubMed]

**Enjuanes, L., F. Almazan, I. Sola and S. Zuniga** **(2006)**. Biochemical aspects of coronavirus replication and virus-host interaction. *Annu Rev Microbiol* **60**: 211-30. [PubMed]

**Escors, D., E. Camafeita, J. Ortego, H. Laude and L. Enjuanes** **(2001)**. Organization of two transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus membrane protein topologies within the virion and core. *J Virol* **75**: 12228-40. [PubMed]

**Farsani, S. M., R. Dijkman, M. F. Jebbink, H. Goossens, M. Ieven, M. Deijs, R. Molenkamp and L. van der Hoek** **(2012)**. The first complete genome sequences of clinical isolates of human coronavirus 229E. *Virus Genes* **45**: 433-9. [PubMed]

**Fehr, A. R., R. Channappanavar, G. Jankevicius, C. Fett, J. Zhao, J. Athmer, D. K. Meyerholz, I. Ahel and S. Perlman** **(2016)**. The conserved coronavirus macrodomain promotes virulence and suppresses the innate immune response during severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. *MBio* **7**: e01721-16. [PubMed]

**Fehr, A. R. and S. Perlman** **(2015)**. Coronaviruses: an overview of their replication and pathogenesis. *Methods Mol Biol* **1282**: 1-23. [PubMed]

**Fett, C., M. L. DeDiego, J. A. Regla-Nava, L. Enjuanes and S. Perlman** **(2013)**. Complete protection against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-mediated lethal respiratory disease in aged mice by immunization with a mouse-adapted virus lacking E protein. *J Virol* **87**: 6551-9. [PubMed]

**Fleming, J. O., R. A. Shubin, M. A. Sussman, N. Casteel and S. A. Stohlman** **(1989)**. Monoclonal antibodies to the matrix (E1) glycoprotein of mouse hepatitis virus protect mice from encephalitis. *Virology* **168**: 162-7. [PubMed]

**Fleming, J. O., M. D. Trousdale, J. Bradbury, S. A. Stohlman and L. P. Weiner** **(1987)**. Experimental demyelination induced by coronavirus JHM (MHV-4): molecular identification of a viral determinant of paralytic disease. *Microb Pathog* **3**: 9-20. [PubMed]

**Gaunt, E. R., A. Hardie, E. C. Claas, P. Simmonds and K. E. Templeton** **(2010)**. Epidemiology and clinical presentations of the four human coronaviruses 229E, HKU1, NL63, and OC43 detected over 3 years using a novel multiplex real-time PCR method. *J Clin Microbiol* **48**: 2940-7. [PubMed]

**Ge, X. Y., J. L. Li, X. L. Yang, A. A. Chmura, G. Zhu, J. H. Epstein, J. K. Mazet, B. Hu, W. Zhang, C. Peng, Y. J. Zhang, C. M. Luo, B. Tan, N. Wang, Y. Zhu, G. Crameri, S. Y. Zhang, L. F. Wang, P. Daszak and Z. L. Shi** **(2013)**. Isolation and characterization of a bat SARS-like coronavirus that uses the ACE2 receptor. *Nature* **503**: 535-8. [PubMed]

**Ghosh, S., T. A. Dellibovi-Ragheb, A. Kerviel, E. Pak, Q. Qiu, M. Fisher, P. M. Takvorian, C. Bleck, V. W. Hsu, A. R. Fehr, S. Perlman, S. R. Achar, M. R. Straus, G. R. Whittaker, C. A. M. de Haan, J. Kehrl, G. Altan-Bonnet and N. Altan-Bonnet** **(2020)**. Beta-coronaviruses use lysosomes for egress instead of the biosynthetic secretory pathway. *Cell* **183**: 1520-35 e14. [PubMed]

**Godet, M., R. Lharidon, J. F. Vautherot and H. Laude** **(1992)**. TGEV coronavirus Orf4 encodes a membrane-protein that Is incorporated into virions. *Virology* **188**: 666-75. [PubMed]

**Gorbalenya, A. E., L. Enjuanes, J. Ziebuhr and E. J. Snijder** **(2006)**. *Nidovirales*: evolving the largest RNA virus genome. *Virus Res* **117**: 17-37. [PubMed]

**Gorbalenya, A. E., D. Samborskiy, S. Junglen, C. Lauber, B. W. Neuman and J. Ziebuhr (2021**). Create 47 new taxa in the order, ranging from subfamilies to species (*Nidovirales*) In. Web address: https://www.ictv.global/proposals/2021.005S.R.Nidovirales.zip.

**Gosert, R., A. Kanjanahaluethai, D. Egger, K. Bienz and S. C. Baker** **(2002)**. RNA replication of mouse hepatitis virus takes place at double-membrane vesicles. *J Virol* **76**: 3697-708. [PubMed]

**Graham, R. L. and M. R. Denison** **(2006)**. Replication of murine hepatitis virus is regulated by papain-like proteinase 1 processing of nonstructural proteins 1, 2, and 3. *J Virol* **80**: 11610-20. [PubMed]

**Gribble, J., L. J. Stevens, M. L. Agostini, J. Anderson-Daniels, J. D. Chappell, X. Lu, A. J. Pruijssers, A. L. Routh and M. R. Denison** **(2021)**. The coronavirus proofreading exoribonuclease mediates extensive viral recombination. *PLoS Pathog* **17**: e1009226. [PubMed]

**Grunewald, M. E., A. R. Fehr, J. Athmer and S. Perlman** **(2018)**. The coronavirus nucleocapsid protein is ADP-ribosylated. *Virology* **517**: 62-8. [PubMed]

**Guo, M., W. Tao, R. A. Flavell and S. Zhu** **(2021)**. Potential intestinal infection and faecal-oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2. *Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol* **18**: 269-83. [PubMed]

**Haagmans, B. L., S. H. Al Dhahiry, C. B. Reusken, V. S. Raj, M. Galiano, R. Myers, G. J. Godeke, M. Jonges, E. Farag, A. Diab, H. Ghobashy, F. Alhajri, M. Al-Thani, S. A. Al-Marri, H. E. Al Romaihi, A. Al Khal, A. Bermingham, A. D. Osterhaus, M. M. AlHajri and M. P. Koopmans** **(2014)**. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus in dromedary camels: an outbreak investigation. *Lancet Infect Dis* **14**: 140-5. [PubMed]

**Haake, C., S. Cook, N. Pusterla and B. Murphy** **(2020)**. Coronavirus infections in companion animals: virology, epidemiology, clinical and pathologic features. *Viruses* **12**: e1023. [PubMed]

**Harcourt, B. H., D. Jukneliene, A. Kanjanahaluethai, J. Bechill, K. M. Severson, C. M. Smith, P. A. Rota and S. C. Baker** **(2004)**. Identification of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus replicase products and characterization of papain-like protease activity. *J Virol* **78**: 13600-12. [PubMed]

**Harvey, W. T., A. M. Carabelli, B. Jackson, R. K. Gupta, E. C. Thomson, E. M. Harrison, C. Ludden, R. Reeve, A. Rambaut, S. J. Peacock and D. L. Robertson** **(2021)**. SARS-CoV-2 variants, spike mutations and immune escape. *Nat Rev Microbiol* **19**: 409-24. [PubMed]

**Hofmann, H., K. Pyrc, L. van der Hoek, M. Geier, B. Berkhout and S. Pohlmann** **(2005)**. Human coronavirus NL63 employs the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus receptor for cellular entry. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **102**: 7988-93. [PubMed]

**Holmes, K. V., E. W. Doller and L. S. Sturman** **(1981)**. Tunicamycin resistant glycosylation of coronavirus glycoprotein: demonstration of a novel type of viral glycoprotein. *Virology* **115**: 334-44. [PubMed]

**Huang, L. R., C. M. Chiu, S. H. Yeh, W. H. Huang, P. R. Hsueh, W. Z. Yang, J. Y. Yang, I. J. Su, S. C. Chang and P. J. Chen** **(2004)**. Evaluation of antibody responses against SARS coronaviral nucleocapsid or spike proteins by immunoblotting or ELISA. *J Med Virol* **73**: 338-46. [PubMed]

**Huang, X., W. Dong, A. Milewska, A. Golda, Y. Qi, Q. K. Zhu, W. A. Marasco, R. S. Baric, A. C. Sims, K. Pyrc, W. Li and J. Sui** **(2015)**. Human coronavirus HKU1 spike protein uses O-acetylated sialic acid as an attachment receptor determinant and employs hemagglutinin-esterase protein as a receptor-destroying enzyme. *J Virol* **89**: 7202-13. [PubMed]

**Hui, D. S., S. Perlman and A. Zumla** **(2015)**. Spread of MERS to South Korea and China. *Lancet Respir Med* **3**: 509-10. [PubMed]

**Hulswit, R. J. G., Y. Lang, M. J. G. Bakkers, W. Li, Z. Li, A. Schouten, B. Ophorst, F. J. M. van Kuppeveld, G. J. Boons, B. J. Bosch, E. G. Huizinga and R. J. de Groot** **(2019)**. Human coronaviruses OC43 and HKU1 bind to 9-O-acetylated sialic acids via a conserved receptor-binding site in spike protein domain A. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **116**: 2681-90. [PubMed]

**Hurdiss, D. L., I. Drulyte, Y. Lang, T. M. Shamorkina, M. F. Pronker, F. J. M. van Kuppeveld, J. Snijder and R. J. de Groot** **(2020)**. Cryo-EM structure of coronavirus-HKU1 haemagglutinin esterase reveals architectural changes arising from prolonged circulation in humans. *Nat Commun* **11**: 4646. [PubMed]

**Imbert, I., J. C. Guillemot, J. M. Bourhis, C. Bussetta, B. Coutard, M. P. Egloff, F. Ferron, A. E. Gorbalenya and B. Canard** **(2006)**. A second, non-canonical RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in SARS coronavirus. *EMBO J* **25**: 4933-42. [PubMed]

**Janetanakit, T., M. Lumyai, N. Bunpapong, S. Boonyapisitsopa, S. Chaiyawong, N. Nonthabenjawan, S. Kesdaengsakonwut and A. Amonsin** **(2016)**. Porcine deltacoronavirus, Thailand, 2015. *Emerg Infect Dis* **22**: 757-9. [PubMed]

**Joseph, J. S., K. S. Saikatendu, V. Subramanian, B. W. Neuman, A. Brooun, M. Griffith, K. Moy, M. K. Yadav, J. Velasquez, M. J. Buchmeier, R. C. Stevens and P. Kuhn** **(2006)**. Crystal structure of nonstructural protein 10 from the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus reveals a novel fold with two zinc-binding motifs. *J Virol* **80**: 7894-901. [PubMed]

**Joseph, J. S., K. S. Saikatendu, V. Subramanian, B. W. Neuman, M. J. Buchmeier, R. C. Stevens and P. Kuhn** **(2007)**. Crystal structure of a monomeric form of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus endonuclease nsp15 suggests a role for hexamerization as an allosteric switch. *J Virol* **81**: 6700-8. [PubMed]

**Kanjanahaluethai, A., Z. Chen, D. Jukneliene and S. C. Baker** **(2007)**. Membrane topology of murine coronavirus replicase nonstructural protein 3. *Virology* **361**: 391-401. [PubMed]

**Kim, E., K. Okada, T. Kenniston, V. S. Raj, M. M. AlHajri, E. A. Farag, F. AlHajri, A. D. Osterhaus, B. L. Haagmans and A. Gambotto** **(2014)**. Immunogenicity of an adenoviral-based Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus vaccine in BALB/c mice. *Vaccine* **32**: 5975-82. [PubMed]

**Kim, K. H., T. E. Tandi, J. W. Choi, J. M. Moon and M. S. Kim** **(2017)**. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) outbreak in South Korea, 2015: epidemiology, characteristics and public health implications. *J Hosp Infect* **95**: 207-13. [PubMed]

**Klumperman, J., J. K. Locker, A. Meijer, M. C. Horzinek, H. J. Geuze and P. J. Rottier** **(1994)**. Coronavirus M proteins accumulate in the Golgi complex beyond the site of virion budding. *J Virol* **68**: 6523-34. [PubMed]

**Koetzner, C. A., K. R. Hurst-Hess, L. Kuo and P. S. Masters** **(2022)**. Analysis of a crucial interaction between the coronavirus nucleocapsid protein and the major membrane-bound subunit of the viral replicase-transcriptase complex. *Virology* **567**: 1-14. [PubMed]

**Ksiazek, T. G., D. Erdman, C. S. Goldsmith, S. R. Zaki, T. Peret, S. Emery, S. Tong, C. Urbani, J. A. Comer, W. Lim, P. E. Rollin, S. F. Dowell, A. E. Ling, C. D. Humphrey, W. J. Shieh, J. Guarner, C. D. Paddock, P. Rota, B. Fields, J. DeRisi, J. Y. Yang, N. Cox, J. M. Hughes, J. W. LeDuc, W. J. Bellini, L. J. Anderson and S. W. Group** **(2003)**. A novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. *New Engl J Med* **348**: 1953-66. [PubMed]

**Lang, Y., W. Li, Z. Li, D. Koerhuis, A. C. S. van den Burg, E. Rozemuller, B. J. Bosch, F. J. M. van Kuppeveld, G. J. Boons, E. G. Huizinga, H. M. van der Schaar and R. J. de Groot** **(2020)**. Coronavirus hemagglutinin-esterase and spike proteins coevolve for functional balance and optimal virion avidity. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **117**: 25759-70. [PubMed]

**Langereis, M. A., A. L. van Vliet, W. Boot and R. J. de Groot** **(2010)**. Attachment of mouse hepatitis virus to O-acetylated sialic acid is mediated by hemagglutinin-esterase and not by the spike protein. *J Virol* **84**: 8970-4. [PubMed]

**Langereis, M. A., Q. Zeng, B. A. Heesters, E. G. Huizinga and R. J. de Groot** **(2012)**. The murine coronavirus hemagglutinin-esterase receptor-binding site: a major shift in ligand specificity through modest changes in architecture. *PLoS Pathog* **8**: e1002492. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K., K. S. Li, A. K. Tsang, C. T. Shek, M. Wang, G. K. Choi, R. Guo, B. H. Wong, R. W. Poon, C. S. Lam, S. Y. Wang, R. Y. Fan, K. H. Chan, B. J. Zheng, P. C. Woo and K. Y. Yuen** **(2012)**. Recent transmission of a novel alphacoronavirus, bat coronavirus HKU10, from Leschenault's rousettes to pomona leaf-nosed bats: first evidence of interspecies transmission of coronavirus between bats of different suborders. *J Virol* **86**: 11906-18. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K., P. C. Woo, K. S. Li, Y. Huang, H. W. Tsoi, B. H. Wong, S. S. Wong, S. Y. Leung, K. H. Chan and K. Y. Yuen** **(2005)**. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-like virus in Chinese horseshoe bats. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **102**: 14040-5. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K., P. C. Woo, K. S. Li, Y. Huang, M. Wang, C. S. Lam, H. Xu, R. Guo, K. H. Chan, B. J. Zheng and K. Y. Yuen** **(2007)**. Complete genome sequence of bat coronavirus HKU2 from Chinese horseshoe bats revealed a much smaller spike gene with a different evolutionary lineage from the rest of the genome. *Virology* **367**: 428-39. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K. P., R. Y. Y. Fan, L. Zhu, K. S. M. Li, A. C. P. Wong, H. K. H. Luk, E. Y. M. Wong, C. S. F. Lam, G. C. S. Lo, J. Fung, Z. He, F. C. H. Fok, R. K. H. Au-Yeung, L. Zhang, K. H. Kok, K. Y. Yuen and P. C. Y. Woo** **(2021)**. Isolation of MERS-related coronavirus from lesser bamboo bats that uses DPP4 and infects human-DPP4-transgenic mice. *Nat Commun* **12**: 216. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K. P., H. K. H. Luk, A. C. P. Wong, R. Y. Y. Fan, C. S. F. Lam, K. S. M. Li, S. S. Ahmed, F. W. N. Chow, J. P. Cai, X. Zhu, J. F. W. Chan, T. C. K. Lau, K. Cao, M. Li, P. C. Y. Woo and K. Y. Yuen** **(2019)**. Identification of a novel betacoronavirus (*Merbecovirus*) in Amur hedgehogs from China. *Viruses* **11**: e0980. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K. P., E. Y. M. Wong, C. C. Tsang, S. S. Ahmed, R. K. H. Au-Yeung, K. Y. Yuen, U. Wernery and P. C. Y. Woo** **(2018a)**. Discovery and sequence analysis of four deltacoronaviruses from birds in the Middle East reveal interspecies jumping with recombination as a potential mechanism for avian-to-avian and avian-to-mammalian transmission. *J Virol* **92**: e00265-18. [PubMed]

**Lau, S. K. P., P. C. Y. Woo, K. S. M. Li, A. K. L. Tsang, R. Y. Y. Fan, H. K. H. Luk, J.-P. Cai, K.-H. Chan, B.-J. Zheng, M. Wang and K.-Y. Yuen** **(2014)**. Discovery of a novel voronavirus, China rattus coronavirus HKU24, from Norway rats supports the murine origin of betacoronavirus 1 and has implications for the ancestor of betacoronavirus lineage A. *J Virol* **89**: 3076-92.

**Lau, S. K. P., L. Zhang, H. K. H. Luk, L. Xiong, X. Peng, K. S. M. Li, X. He, P. S. Zhao, R. Y. Y. Fan, A. C. P. Wong, S. S. Ahmed, J. P. Cai, J. F. W. Chan, Y. Sun, D. Jin, H. Chen, T. C. K. Lau, R. K. H. Kok, W. Li, K. Y. Yuen and P. C. Y. Woo** **(2018b)**. Receptor usage of a novel bat lineage C betacoronavirus reveals evolution of Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus spike proteins for human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 binding. *J Infect Dis* **218**: 197-207. [PubMed]

**Lauber, C. and A. E. Gorbalenya** **(2012)**. Partitioning the genetic diversity of a virus family: approach and evaluation through a case study of picornaviruses. *J Virol* **86**: 3890-904. [PubMed]

**Le, V. P., S. Song, B. H. An, G. N. Park, N. T. Pham, D. Q. Le, V. T. Nguyen, T. T. H. Vu, K. S. Kim, S. Choe and D. J. An** **(2018)**. A novel strain of porcine deltacoronavirus in Vietnam. *Arch Virol* **163**: 203-7. [PubMed]

**Lednicky, J. A., M. S. Tagliamonte, S. K. White, M. A. Elbadry, M. M. Alam, C. J. Stephenson, T. S. Bonny, J. C. Loeb, T. Telisma, S. Chavannes, D. A. Ostrov, C. Mavian, V. M. Beau De Rochars, M. Salemi and J. G. Morris, Jr.** **(2021)**. Independent infections of porcine deltacoronavirus among Haitian children. *Nature* **600**: 133-7. [PubMed]

**Lee, J. H., H. C. Chung, V. G. Nguyen, H. J. Moon, H. K. Kim, S. J. Park, C. H. Lee, G. E. Lee and B. K. Park** **(2016)**. Detection and phylogenetic analysis of porcine deltacoronavirus in Korean swine farms, 2015. *Transbound Emerg Dis* **63**: 248-52. [PubMed]

**Lehmann, K. C., A. Gulyaeva, J. C. Zevenhoven-Dobbe, G. M. Janssen, M. Ruben, H. S. Overkleeft, P. A. van Veelen, D. V. Samborskiy, A. A. Kravchenko, A. M. Leontovich, I. A. Sidorov, E. J. Snijder, C. C. Posthuma and A. E. Gorbalenya** **(2015)**. Discovery of an essential nucleotidylating activity associated with a newly delineated conserved domain in the RNA polymerase-containing protein of all nidoviruses. *Nucleic Acids Res* **43**: 8416-34. [PubMed]

**Letko, M., A. Marzi and V. Munster** **(2020)**. Functional assessment of cell entry and receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and other lineage B betacoronaviruses. *Nat Microbiol* **5**: 562-9. [PubMed]

**Li, F., W. Li, M. Farzan and S. C. Harrison** **(2005a)**. Structure of SARS coronavirus spike receptor-binding domain complexed with receptor. *Science* **309**: 1864-8. [PubMed]

**Li, W., R. J. G. Hulswit, I. Widjaja, V. S. Raj, R. McBride, W. Peng, W. Widagdo, M. A. Tortorici, B. van Dieren, Y. Lang, J. W. M. van Lent, J. C. Paulson, C. A. M. de Haan, R. J. de Groot, F. J. M. van Kuppeveld, B. L. Haagmans and B. J. Bosch** **(2017)**. Identification of sialic acid-binding function for the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike glycoprotein. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **114**: E8508-E17. [PubMed]

**Li, W., Z. Shi, M. Yu, W. Ren, C. Smith, J. H. Epstein, H. Wang, G. Crameri, Z. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. McEachern, H. Field, P. Daszak, B. T. Eaton, S. Zhang and L. F. Wang** **(2005b)**. Bats are natural reservoirs of SARS-like coronaviruses. *Science* **310**: 676-9. [PubMed]

**Liao, Y., Q. Yuan, J. Torres, J. P. Tam and D. X. Liu** **(2006)**. Biochemical and functional characterization of the membrane association and membrane permeabilizing activity of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus envelope protein. *Virology* **349**: 264-75. [PubMed]

**Lin, X., K. L. O'Reilly, M. L. Burrell and J. Storz** **(2001)**. Infectivity-neutralizing and hemagglutinin-inhibiting antibody responses to respiratory coronavirus infections of cattle in pathogenesis of shipping fever pneumonia. *Clin Diagn Lab Immunol* **8**: 357-62. [PubMed]

**Lin, X. D., W. Wang, Z. Y. Hao, Z. X. Wang, W. P. Guo, X. Q. Guan, M. R. Wang, H. W. Wang, R. H. Zhou, M. H. Li, G. P. Tang, J. Wu, E. C. Holmes and Y. Z. Zhang** **(2017)**. Extensive diversity of coronaviruses in bats from China. *Virology* **507**: 1-10. [PubMed]

**Liu, C., J. Tang, Y. Ma, X. Liang, Y. Yang, G. Peng, Q. Qi, S. Jiang, J. Li, L. Du and F. Li** **(2015)**. Receptor usage and cell entry of porcine epidemic diarrhea coronavirus. *J Virol* **89**: 6121-5. [PubMed]

**Locker, J. K., J. K. Rose, M. C. Horzinek and P. J. Rottier** **(1992)**. Membrane assembly of the triple-spanning coronavirus M protein. Individual transmembrane domains show preferred orientation. *J Biol Chem* **267**: 21911-8. [PubMed]

**Lopez, L. A., A. J. Riffle, S. L. Pike, D. Gardner and B. G. Hogue** **(2008)**. Importance of conserved cysteine residues in the coronavirus envelope protein. *J Virol* **82**: 3000-10. [PubMed]

**Madapong, A., K. Saeng-Chuto, A. Lorsirigool, G. Temeeyasen, A. Srijangwad, T. Tripipat, M. Wegner and D. Nilubol** **(2016)**. Complete genome sequence of porcine deltacoronavirus isolated in Thailand in 2015. *Genome Announc* **4**: 8-16. [PubMed]

**Malone, B., N. Urakova, E. J. Snijder and E. A. Campbell** **(2022)**. Structures and functions of coronavirus replication-transcription complexes and their relevance for SARS-CoV-2 drug design. *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol* **23**: 21-39. [PubMed]

**Mathewson, A. C., A. Bishop, Y. Yao, F. Kemp, J. Ren, H. Chen, X. Xu, B. Berkhout, L. van der Hoek and I. M. Jones** **(2008)**. Interaction of severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus and NL63 coronavirus spike proteins with angiotensin converting enzyme-2. *J Gen Virol* **89**: 2741-5. [PubMed]

**Mihindukulasuriya, K. A., G. Wu, J. St Leger, R. W. Nordhausen and D. Wang** **(2008)**. Identification of a novel coronavirus from a beluga whale by using a panviral microarray. *J Virol* **82**: 5084-8. [PubMed]

**Miller, A. K., J. C. O. Mifsud, V. A. Costa, R. M. Grimwood, J. Kitson, C. Baker, C. L. Brosnahan, A. Pande, E. C. Holmes, N. J. Gemmell and J. L. Geoghegan** **(2021)**. Slippery when wet: cross-species transmission of divergent coronaviruses in bony and jawless fish and the evolutionary history of the *Coronaviridae*. *Virus Evol* **7**: veab050. [PubMed]

**Monto, A. S. and S. K. Lim** **(1974)**. The Tecumseh study of respiratory illness. VI. Frequency of and relationship between outbreaks of coronavirus infection. *J Infect Dis* **129**: 271-6. [PubMed]

**Mordecai, G. J., K. M. Miller, E. Di Cicco, A. D. Schulze, K. H. Kaukinen, T. J. Ming, S. Li, A. Tabata, A. Teffer, D. A. Patterson, H. W. Ferguson and C. A. Suttle** **(2019)**. Endangered wild salmon infected by newly discovered viruses. *Elife* **8**: e47615. [PubMed]

**Mou, H., V. S. Raj, F. J. van Kuppeveld, P. J. Rottier, B. L. Haagmans and B. J. Bosch** **(2013)**. The receptor binding domain of the new Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus maps to a 231-residue region in the spike protein that efficiently elicits neutralizing antibodies. *J Virol* **87**: 9379-83. [PubMed]

**Muller, M. A., L. van der Hoek, D. Voss, O. Bader, D. Lehmann, A. R. Schulz, S. Kallies, T. Suliman, B. C. Fielding, C. Drosten and M. Niedrig** **(2010)**. Human coronavirus NL63 open reading frame 3 encodes a virion-incorporated N-glycosylated membrane protein. *Virol J* **7**: 6. [PubMed]

**Neuman, B. W., J. S. Joseph, K. S. Saikatendu, P. Serrano, A. Chatterjee, M. A. Johnson, L. Liao, J. P. Klaus, J. R. Yates, 3rd, K. Wuthrich, R. C. Stevens, M. J. Buchmeier and P. Kuhn** **(2008)**. Proteomics analysis unravels the functional repertoire of coronavirus nonstructural protein 3. *J Virol* **82**: 5279-94. [PubMed]

**Neuman, B. W., G. Kiss, A. H. Kunding, D. Bhella, M. F. Baksh, S. Connelly, B. Droese, J. P. Klaus, S. Makino, S. G. Sawicki, S. G. Siddell, D. G. Stamou, I. A. Wilson, P. Kuhn and M. J. Buchmeier** **(2011)**. A structural analysis of M protein in coronavirus assembly and morphology. *J Struct Biol* **174**: 11-22. [PubMed]

**Niemeyer, D., T. Zillinger, D. Muth, F. Zielecki, G. Horvath, T. Suliman, W. Barchet, F. Weber, C. Drosten and M. A. Muller** **(2013)**. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus accessory protein 4a is a type I interferon antagonist. *J Virol* **87**: 12489-95. [PubMed]

**Nyberg, T., N. M. Ferguson, S. G. Nash, H. H. Webster, S. Flaxman, N. Andrews, W. Hinsley, J. L. Bernal, M. Kall, S. Bhatt, P. Blomquist, A. Zaidi, E. Volz, N. A. Aziz, K. Harman, S. Funk, S. Abbott, C.-G. U. consortium, R. Hope, A. Charlett, M. Chand, A. C. Ghani, S. R. Seaman, G. Dabrera, D. De Angelis, A. M. Presanis and S. Thelwall** **(2022)**. Comparative analysis of the risks of hospitalisation and death associated with SARS-CoV-2 omicron (B.1.1.529) and delta (B.1.617.2) variants in England: a cohort study. *Lancet* **399**: 1303-12. [PubMed]

**Ogando, N. S., J. C. Zevenhoven-Dobbe, Y. van der Meer, P. J. Bredenbeek, C. C. Posthuma and E. J. Snijder** **(2020)**. The enzymatic activity of the nsp14 exoribonuclease Is critical for replication of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. *J Virol* **94**: e01246-20. [PubMed]

**Papineau, A., Y. Berhane, T. N. Wylie, K. M. Wylie, S. Sharpe and O. Lung** **(2019)**. Genome organization of Canada goose coronavirus, a novel species edentified in a mass die-off of Canada geese. *Sci Rep* **9**: 5954. [PubMed]

**Park, G. J., A. Osinski, G. Hernandez, J. L. Eitson, A. Majumdar, M. Tonelli, K. Henzler-Wildman, K. Pawlowski, Z. Chen, Y. Li, J. W. Schoggins and V. S. Tagliabracci** **(2022a)**. The mechanism of RNA capping by SARS-CoV-2. *Res Sq* **doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-1336910/v1**. [PubMed]

**Park, G. J., A. Osinski, G. Hernandez, J. L. Eitson, A. Majumdar, M. Tonelli, K. Henzler-Wildman, K. Pawlowski, Z. Chen, Y. Li, J. W. Schoggins and V. S. Tagliabracci** **(2022b)**. The mechanism of RNA capping by SARS-CoV-2. *Nature* **609**: 793-800. [PubMed]

**Patterson, E. I., T. Prince, E. R. Anderson, A. Casas-Sanchez, S. L. Smith, C. Cansado-Utrilla, T. Solomon, M. J. Griffiths, A. Acosta-Serrano, L. Turtle and G. L. Hughes** **(2020)**. Methods of inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 for downstream biological assays. *J Infect Dis* **222**: 1462-7. [PubMed]

**Peiris, J. S., S. T. Lai, L. L. Poon, Y. Guan, L. Y. Yam, W. Lim, J. Nicholls, W. K. Yee, W. W. Yan, M. T. Cheung, V. C. Cheng, K. H. Chan, D. N. Tsang, R. W. Yung, T. K. Ng and K. Y. Yuen** **(2003)**. Coronavirus as a possible cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome. *Lancet* **361**: 1319-25. [PubMed]

**Pensaert, M. B. and P. de Bouck** **(1978)**. A new coronavirus-like particle associated with diarrhea in swine. *Arch Virol* **58**: 243-7. [PubMed]

**Perlman, S. and J. Netland** **(2009)**. Coronaviruses post-SARS: update on replication and pathogenesis. *Nat Rev Microbiol* **7**: 439-50. [PubMed]

**Petit, C. M., V. N. Chouljenko, A. Iyer, R. Colgrove, M. Farzan, D. M. Knipe and K. G. Kousoulas** **(2007)**. Palmitoylation of the cysteine-rich endodomain of the SARS-coronavirus spike glycoprotein is important for spike-mediated cell fusion. *Virology* **360**: 264-74. [PubMed]

**Pohlmann, S., T. Gramberg, A. Wegele, K. Pyrc, L. van der Hoek, B. Berkhout and H. Hofmann** **(2006)**. Interaction between the spike protein of human coronavirus NL63 and its cellular receptor ACE2. *Adv Exp Med Biol* **581**: 281-4. [PubMed]

**Principi, N., S. Bosis and S. Esposito** **(2010)**. Effects of coronavirus infections in children. *Emerg Infect Dis* **16**: 183-8. [PubMed]

**Rabouw, H. H., M. A. Langereis, R. C. Knaap, T. J. Dalebout, J. Canton, I. Sola, L. Enjuanes, P. J. Bredenbeek, M. Kikkert, R. J. de Groot and F. J. van Kuppeveld** **(2016)**. Middle East respiratory coronavirus accessory protein 4a inhibits PKR-mediated antiviral stress responses. *PLoS Pathog* **12**: e1005982. [PubMed]

**Raj, V. S., E. A. Farag, C. B. Reusken, M. M. Lamers, S. D. Pas, J. Voermans, S. L. Smits, A. D. Osterhaus, N. Al-Mawlawi, H. E. Al-Romaihi, M. M. AlHajri, A. M. El-Sayed, K. A. Mohran, H. Ghobashy, F. Alhajri, M. Al-Thani, S. A. Al-Marri, M. M. El-Maghraby, M. P. Koopmans and B. L. Haagmans** **(2014)**. Isolation of MERS coronavirus from a dromedary camel, Qatar, 2014. *Emerg Infect Dis* **20**: 1339-42. [PubMed]

**Raj, V. S., H. Mou, S. L. Smits, D. H. Dekkers, M. A. Muller, R. Dijkman, D. Muth, J. A. Demmers, A. Zaki, R. A. Fouchier, V. Thiel, C. Drosten, P. J. Rottier, A. D. Osterhaus, B. J. Bosch and B. L. Haagmans** **(2013)**. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human coronavirus-EMC. *Nature* **495**: 251-4. [PubMed]

**Reincke, S. M., M. Yuan, H. C. Kornau, V. M. Corman, S. van Hoof, E. Sanchez-Sendin, M. Ramberger, W. Yu, Y. Hua, H. Tien, M. L. Schmidt, T. Schwarz, L. M. Jeworowski, S. E. Brandl, H. F. Rasmussen, M. A. Homeyer, L. Stoffler, M. Barner, D. Kunkel, S. Huo, J. Horler, N. von Wardenburg, I. Kroidl, T. M. Eser, A. Wieser, C. Geldmacher, M. Hoelscher, H. Ganzer, G. Weiss, D. Schmitz, C. Drosten, H. Pruss, I. A. Wilson and J. Kreye** **(2022)**. SARS-CoV-2 Beta variant infection elicits potent lineage-specific and cross-reactive antibodies. *Science* **375**: 782-7. [PubMed]

**Richard, M., A. Kok, D. de Meulder, T. M. Bestebroer, M. M. Lamers, N. M. A. Okba, M. Fentener van Vlissingen, B. Rockx, B. L. Haagmans, M. P. G. Koopmans, R. A. M. Fouchier and S. Herfst** **(2020)**. SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted via contact and via the air between ferrets. *Nat Commun* **11**: 3496. [PubMed]

**Rockx, B., T. Kuiken, S. Herfst, T. Bestebroer, M. M. Lamers, B. B. Oude Munnink, D. de Meulder, G. van Amerongen, J. van den Brand, N. M. A. Okba, D. Schipper, P. van Run, L. Leijten, R. Sikkema, E. Verschoor, B. Verstrepen, W. Bogers, J. Langermans, C. Drosten, M. Fentener van Vlissingen, R. Fouchier, R. de Swart, M. Koopmans and B. L. Haagmans** **(2020)**. Comparative pathogenesis of COVID-19, MERS, and SARS in a nonhuman primate model. *Science* **368**: 1012-5. [PubMed]

**Sabir, J. S., T. T. Lam, M. M. Ahmed, L. Li, Y. Shen, S. E. Abo-Aba, M. I. Qureshi, M. Abu-Zeid, Y. Zhang, M. A. Khiyami, N. S. Alharbi, N. H. Hajrah, M. J. Sabir, M. H. Mutwakil, S. A. Kabli, F. A. Alsulaimany, A. Y. Obaid, B. Zhou, D. K. Smith, E. C. Holmes, H. Zhu and Y. Guan** **(2016)**. Co-circulation of three camel coronavirus species and recombination of MERS-CoVs in Saudi Arabia. *Science* **351**: 81-4. [PubMed]

**Saeng-Chuto, K., A. Lorsirigool, G. Temeeyasen, D. T. Vui, C. J. Stott, A. Madapong, T. Tripipat, M. Wegner, M. Intrakamhaeng, W. Chongcharoen, A. Tantituvanont, P. Kaewprommal, J. Piriyapongsa and D. Nilubol** **(2017)**. Different lineage of porcine deltacoronavirus in Thailand, Vietnam and Lao PDR in 2015. *Transbound Emerg Dis* **64**: 3-10. [PubMed]

**Saikatendu, K. S., J. S. Joseph, V. Subramanian, B. W. Neuman, M. J. Buchmeier, R. C. Stevens and P. Kuhn** **(2007)**. Ribonucleocapsid formation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus through molecular action of the N-terminal domain of N protein. *J Virol* **81**: 3913-21. [PubMed]

**Sanchez, C. M., A. Pascual-Iglesias, I. Sola, S. Zuniga and L. Enjuanes** **(2019)**. Minimum determinants of transmissible gastroenteritis virus enteric tropism are located in the N-terminus of spike protein. *Pathogens* **9**: e0002. [PubMed]

**Sawicki, S. G. and D. L. Sawicki** **(1990)**. Coronavirus transcription: subgenomic mouse hepatitis virus replicative intermediates function in RNA synthesis. *J Virol* **64**: 1050-6. [PubMed]

**Sawicki, S. G. and D. L. Sawicki** **(2005)**. Coronavirus transcription: a perspective. *Curr Top Microbiol Immunol* **287**: 31-55. [PubMed]

**Schroeder, S., F. Pott, D. Niemeyer, T. Veith, A. Richter, D. Muth, C. Goffinet, M. A. Muller and C. Drosten** **(2021)**. Interferon antagonism by SARS-CoV-2: a functional study using reverse genetics. *Lancet Microbe* **2**: e210-e8. [PubMed]

**Sethna, P. B., M. A. Hofmann and D. A. Brian** **(1991)**. Minus-strand copies of replicating coronavirus mRNAs contain antileaders. *J Virol* **65**: 320-5. [PubMed]

**Sethna, P. B., S. L. Hung and D. A. Brian** **(1989)**. Coronavirus subgenomic minus-strand RNAs and the potential for mRNA replicons. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **86**: 5626-30. [PubMed]

**Shi, M., X.-D. Lin, X. Chen, J.-H. Tian, L.-J. Chen, K. Li, W. Wang, J.-S. Eden, J.-J. Shen, L. Liu, E. C. Holmes and Y.-Z. Zhang** **(2018)**. The evolutionary history of vertebrate RNA viruses. *Nature* **556**: 197-202. [PubMed]

**Sims, A. C., R. S. Baric, B. Yount, S. E. Burkett, P. L. Collins and R. J. Pickles** **(2005)**. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection of human ciliated airway epithelia: role of ciliated cells in viral spread in the conducting airways of the lungs. *J Virol* **79**: 15511-24. [PubMed]

**Slanina, H., R. Madhugiri, G. Bylapudi, K. Schultheiss, N. Karl, A. Gulyaeva, A. E. Gorbalenya, U. Linne and J. Ziebuhr** **(2021)**. Coronavirus replication-transcription complex: Vital and selective NMPylation of a conserved site in nsp9 by the NiRAN-RdRp subunit. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **118**: e2022310118. [PubMed]

**Smith, M. K., S. Tusell, E. A. Travanty, B. Berkhout, L. van der Hoek and K. V. Holmes** **(2006)**. Human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a receptor for human respiratory coronavirus NL63. *Adv Exp Med Biol* **581**: 285-8. [PubMed]

**Smith, S. H., G. A. Somsen, C. van Rijn, S. Kooij, L. van der Hoek, R. A. Bem and D. Bonn** **(2020)**. Aerosol persistence in relation to possible transmission of SARS-CoV-2. *Phys Fluids (1994)* **32**: 107108. [PubMed]

**Smits, S. L., A. L. van Vliet, K. Segeren, H. el Azzouzi, M. van Essen and R. J. de Groot** **(2005)**. Torovirus non-discontinuous transcription: mutational analysis of a subgenomic mRNA promoter. *J Virol* **79**: 8275-81. [PubMed]

**Sola, I., F. Almazan, S. Zuniga and L. Enjuanes** **(2015)**. Continuous and discontinuous RNA synthesis in coronaviruses. *Annu Rev Virol* **2**: 265-88. [PubMed]

**Sola, I., J. L. Moreno, S. Zuniga, S. Alonso and L. Enjuanes** **(2005)**. Role of nucleotides immediately flanking the transcription-regulating sequence core in coronavirus subgenomic mRNA synthesis. *J Virol* **79**: 2506-16. [PubMed]

**Stertz, S., M. Reichelt, M. Spiegel, T. Kuri, L. Martinez-Sobrido, A. Garcia-Sastre, F. Weber and G. Kochs** **(2007)**. The intracellular sites of early replication and budding of SARS-coronavirus. *Virology* **361**: 304-15. [PubMed]

**Su, D., Z. Lou, F. Sun, Y. Zhai, H. Yang, R. Zhang, A. Joachimiak, X. C. Zhang, M. Bartlam and Z. Rao** **(2006)**. Dodecamer structure of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nonstructural protein nsp10. *J Virol* **80**: 7902-8. [PubMed]

**Su, S., G. Wong, W. Shi, J. Liu, A. C. K. Lai, J. Zhou, W. Liu, Y. Bi and G. F. Gao** **(2016)**. Epidemiology, genetic recombination, and pathogenesis of coronaviruses. *Trends Microbiol* **24**: 490-502. [PubMed]

**Tan, Y. J., P. Y. Goh, B. C. Fielding, S. Shen, C. F. Chou, J. L. Fu, H. N. Leong, Y. S. Leo, E. E. Ooi, A. E. Ling, S. G. Lim and W. Hong** **(2004)**. Profiles of antibody responses against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus recombinant proteins and their potential use as diagnostic markers. *Clin Diagn Lab Immunol* **11**: 362-71. [PubMed]

**Tang, X. C., J. X. Zhang, S. Y. Zhang, P. Wang, X. H. Fan, L. F. Li, G. Li, B. Q. Dong, W. Liu, C. L. Cheung, K. M. Xu, W. J. Song, D. Vijaykrishna, L. L. Poon, J. S. Peiris, G. J. Smith, H. Chen and Y. Guan** **(2006)**. Prevalence and genetic diversity of coronaviruses in bats from China. *J Virol* **80**: 7481-90. [PubMed]

**Tao, Y., M. Shi, C. Chommanard, K. Queen, J. Zhang, W. Markotter, I. V. Kuzmin, E. C. Holmes and S. Tong** **(2017)**. Surveillance of bat coronaviruses in Kenya identifies relatives of human coronaviruses NL63 and 229E and their recombination history. *J Virol* **91**: e01953-16. [PubMed]

**te Velthuis, A. J., S. H. van den Worm and E. J. Snijder** **(2012)**. The SARS-coronavirus nsp7+nsp8 complex is a unique multimeric RNA polymerase capable of both *de novo* initiation and primer extension. *Nucleic Acids Res* **40**: 1737-47. [PubMed]

**Thompson, C. P., N. E. Grayson, R. S. Paton, J. S. Bolton, J. Lourenco, B. S. Penman, L. N. Lee, V. Odon, J. Mongkolsapaya, S. Chinnakannan, W. Dejnirattisai, M. Edmans, A. Fyfe, C. Imlach, K. Kooblall, N. Lim, C. Liu, C. Lopez-Camacho, C. McInally, A. L. McNaughton, N. Ramamurthy, J. Ratcliff, P. Supasa, O. Sampson, B. Wang, A. J. Mentzer, M. Turner, M. G. Semple, K. Baillie, I. C. Investigators, H. Harvala, G. R. Screaton, N. Temperton, P. Klenerman, L. M. Jarvis, S. Gupta and P. Simmonds** **(2020)**. Detection of neutralising antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 to determine population exposure in Scottish blood donors between March and May 2020. *Euro Surveill* **25**: e2000685. [PubMed]

**Tijms, M. A., L. C. van Dinten, A. E. Gorbalenya and E. J. Snijder** **(2001)**. A zinc finger-containing papain-like protease couples subgenomic mRNA synthesis to genome translation in a positive-stranded RNA virus. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **98**: 1889-94. [PubMed]

**Tortorici, M. A., A. C. Walls, Y. Lang, C. Wang, Z. Li, D. Koerhuis, G. J. Boons, B. J. Bosch, F. A. Rey, R. J. de Groot and D. Veesler** **(2019)**. Structural basis for human coronavirus attachment to sialic acid receptors. *Nat Struct Mol Biol* **26**: 481-9. [PubMed]

**Tyrrell, D. A. and M. L. Bynoe** **(1965)**. Cultivation of a novel type of common-cold virus in organ cultures. *BMJ* **1**: 1467-70. [PubMed]

**V'Kovski, P., A. Kratzel, S. Steiner, H. Stalder and V. Thiel** **(2021)**. Coronavirus biology and replication: implications for SARS-CoV-2. *Nat Rev Microbiol* **19**: 155-70. [PubMed]

**van Boheemen, S., M. de Graaf, C. Lauber, T. M. Bestebroer, V. S. Raj, A. M. Zaki, A. D. Osterhaus, B. L. Haagmans, A. E. Gorbalenya, E. J. Snijder and R. A. Fouchier** **(2012)**. Genomic characterization of a newly discovered coronavirus associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome in humans. *MBio* **3**: e00473-12. [PubMed]

**van der Hoek, L., G. Ihorst, K. Sure, A. Vabret, R. Dijkman, M. de Vries, J. Forster, B. Berkhout and K. Uberla** **(2010)**. Burden of disease due to human coronavirus NL63 infections and periodicity of infection. *J Clin Virol* **48**: 104-8. [PubMed]

**van der Hoek, L., K. Pyrc, M. F. Jebbink, W. Vermeulen-Oost, R. J. Berkhout, K. C. Wolthers, P. M. Wertheim-van Dillen, J. Kaandorp, J. Spaargaren and B. Berkhout** **(2004)**. Identification of a new human coronavirus. *Nat Med* **10**: 368-73. [PubMed]

**van der Hoek, L., K. Sure, G. Ihorst, A. Stang, K. Pyrc, M. F. Jebbink, G. Petersen, J. Forster, B. Berkhout and K. Uberla** **(2005)**. Croup is associated with the novel coronavirus NL63. *PLoS Med* **2**: e240. [PubMed]

**van Kampen, J. J. A., D. van de Vijver, P. L. A. Fraaij, B. L. Haagmans, M. M. Lamers, N. Okba, J. P. C. van den Akker, H. Endeman, D. Gommers, J. J. Cornelissen, R. A. S. Hoek, M. M. van der Eerden, D. A. Hesselink, H. J. Metselaar, A. Verbon, J. E. M. de Steenwinkel, G. I. Aron, E. C. M. van Gorp, S. van Boheemen, J. C. Voermans, C. A. B. Boucher, R. Molenkamp, M. P. G. Koopmans, C. Geurtsvankessel and A. A. van der Eijk** **(2021)**. Duration and key determinants of infectious virus shedding in hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19). *Nat Commun* **12**: 267. [PubMed]

**Vijgen, L., E. Keyaerts, E. Moes, I. Thoelen, E. Wollants, P. Lemey, A. M. Vandamme and M. Van Ranst** **(2005)**. Complete genomic sequence of human coronavirus OC43: molecular clock analysis suggests a relatively recent zoonotic coronavirus transmission event. *J Virol* **79**: 1595-604. [PubMed]

**Vlasova, A. N., A. Diaz, D. Damtie, L. Xiu, T. H. Toh, J. S. Lee, L. J. Saif and G. C. Gray** **(2022)**. Novel canine coronavirus Isolated from a hospitalized patient with pneumonia in East Malaysia. *Clin Infect Dis* **74**: 446-54. [PubMed]

**Vlasova, A. N., R. Halpin, S. Wang, E. Ghedin, D. J. Spiro and L. J. Saif** **(2011)**. Molecular characterization of a new species in the genus *Alphacoronavirus* associated with mink epizootic catarrhal gastroenteritis. *J Gen Virol* **92**: 1369-79. [PubMed]

**Voss, D., A. Kern, E. Traggiai, M. Eickmann, K. Stadler, A. Lanzavecchia and S. Becker** **(2006)**. Characterization of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus membrane protein. *FEBS Lett* **580**: 968-73. [PubMed]

**Voss, D., S. Pfefferle, C. Drosten, L. Stevermann, E. Traggiai, A. Lanzavecchia and S. Becker** **(2009)**. Studies on membrane topology, N-glycosylation and functionality of SARS-CoV membrane protein. *Virol J* **6**: 79. [PubMed]

**Wacharapluesadee, S., C. W. Tan, P. Maneeorn, P. Duengkae, F. Zhu, Y. Joyjinda, T. Kaewpom, W. N. Chia, W. Ampoot, B. L. Lim, K. Worachotsueptrakun, V. C. Chen, N. Sirichan, C. Ruchisrisarod, A. Rodpan, K. Noradechanon, T. Phaichana, N. Jantarat, B. Thongnumchaima, C. Tu, G. Crameri, M. M. Stokes, T. Hemachudha and L. F. Wang** **(2021)**. Evidence for SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses circulating in bats and pangolins in Southeast Asia. *Nat Commun* **12**: 1430. [PubMed]

**Walls, A. C., Y. J. Park, M. A. Tortorici, A. Wall, A. T. McGuire and D. Veesler** **(2020)**. Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. *Cell* **181**: 281-92.e6. [PubMed]

**Wang, B., Y. Liu, C. M. Ji, Y. L. Yang, Q. Z. Liang, P. Zhao, L. D. Xu, X. M. Lei, W. T. Luo, P. Qin, J. Zhou and Y. W. Huang** **(2018)**. Porcine deltacoronavirus engages the transmissible gastroenteritis virus functional receptor porcine aminopeptidase N for infectious cellular entry. *J Virol* **92**: e00318-18. [PubMed]

**Wang, C., R. van Haperen, J. Gutierrez-Alvarez, W. Li, N. M. A. Okba, I. Albulescu, I. Widjaja, B. van Dieren, R. Fernandez-Delgado, I. Sola, D. L. Hurdiss, O. Daramola, F. Grosveld, F. J. M. van Kuppeveld, B. L. Haagmans, L. Enjuanes, D. Drabek and B. J. Bosch** **(2021)**. A conserved immunogenic and vulnerable site on the coronavirus spike protein delineated by cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies. *Nat Commun* **12**: 1715. [PubMed]

**Wang, L., B. Byrum and Y. Zhang** **(2014a)**. Porcine coronavirus HKU15 detected in 9 US states, 2014. *Emerg Infect Dis* **20**: 1594-5. [PubMed]

**Wang, L., Y. Zhang and B. Byrum** **(2014b)**. Complete genome sequence of porcine coronavirus HKU15 strain IN2847 from the United States. *Genome Announc* **2**: e00291-14. [PubMed]

**Wang, Q., J. Qi, Y. Yuan, Y. Xuan, P. Han, Y. Wan, W. Ji, Y. Li, Y. Wu, J. Wang, A. Iwamoto, P. C. Woo, K. Y. Yuen, J. Yan, G. Lu and G. F. Gao** **(2014c)**. Bat origins of MERS-CoV supported by bat coronavirus HKU4 usage of human receptor CD26. *Cell Host Microbe* **16**: 328-37. [PubMed]

**Wang, W., X. D. Lin, W. P. Guo, R. H. Zhou, M. R. Wang, C. Q. Wang, S. Ge, S. H. Mei, M. H. Li, M. Shi, E. C. Holmes and Y. Z. Zhang** **(2015)**. Discovery, diversity and evolution of novel coronaviruses sampled from rodents in China. *Virology* **474**: 19-27. [PubMed]

**Whittaker, G. R., N. M. Andre and J. K. Millet** **(2018)**. Improving virus taxonomy by recontextualizing sequence-based classification with biologically relevant data: the case of the *Alphacoronavirus 1* species. *mSphere* **3**: e00463-17. [PubMed]

**Widagdo, W., N. M. A. Okba, W. Li, A. de Jong, R. L. de Swart, L. Begeman, J. M. A. van den Brand, B. J. Bosch and B. L. Haagmans** **(2019)**. Species-specific colocalization of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus attachment and entry receptors. *J Virol* **93**: e00107-19. [PubMed]

**Williams, R. K., G. S. Jiang and K. V. Holmes** **(1991)**. Receptor for mouse hepatitis virus is a member of the carcinoembryonic antigen family of glycoproteins. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **88**: 5533-6. [PubMed]

**Williamson, J. S. and S. A. Stohlman** **(1990)**. Effective clearance of mouse hepatitis virus from the central nervous system requires both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. *J Virol* **64**: 4589-92. [PubMed]

**Winter, C., C. Schwegmann-Wessels, D. Cavanagh, U. Neumann and G. Herrler** **(2006)**. Sialic acid is a receptor determinant for infection of cells by avian Infectious bronchitis virus. *J Gen Virol* **87**: 1209-16. [PubMed]

**Wolff, G., R. Limpens, J. C. Zevenhoven-Dobbe, U. Laugks, S. Zheng, A. W. M. de Jong, R. I. Koning, D. A. Agard, K. Grunewald, A. J. Koster, E. J. Snijder and M. Barcena** **(2020)**. A molecular pore spans the double membrane of the coronavirus replication organelle. *Science* **369**: 1395-8. [PubMed]

**Wong, A. C. P., S. K. P. Lau and P. C. Y. Woo** **(2021)**. Interspecies jumping of bat coronaviruses. *Viruses* **13**: e2188. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, C. M. Chu, K. H. Chan, H. W. Tsoi, Y. Huang, B. H. Wong, R. W. Poon, J. J. Cai, W. K. Luk, L. L. Poon, S. S. Wong, Y. Guan, J. S. Peiris and K. Y. Yuen** **(2005)**. Characterization and complete genome sequence of a novel coronavirus, coronavirus HKU1, from patients with pneumonia. *J Virol* **79**: 884-95. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, Y. Huang and K. Y. Yuen** **(2009a)**. Coronavirus diversity, phylogeny and interspecies jumping. *Exp Biol Med (Maywood)* **234**: 1117-27. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, C. S. Lam, K. K. Lai, Y. Huang, P. Lee, G. S. Luk, K. C. Dyrting, K. H. Chan and K. Y. Yuen** **(2009b)**. Comparative analysis of complete genome sequences of three avian coronaviruses reveals a novel group 3c coronavirus. *J Virol* **83**: 908-17. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, C. S. Lam, C. C. Lau, A. K. Tsang, J. H. Lau, R. Bai, J. L. Teng, C. C. Tsang, M. Wang, B. J. Zheng, K. H. Chan and K. Y. Yuen** **(2012)**. Discovery of seven novel mammalian and avian coronaviruses in the genus *Deltacoronavirus* supports bat coronaviruses as the gene source of *Alphacoronavirus* and *Betacoronavirus* and avian coronaviruses as the gene source of *Gammacoronavirus* and *Deltacoronavirus*. *J Virol* **86**: 3995-4008. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, K. S. Li, R. W. Poon, B. H. Wong, H. W. Tsoi, B. C. Yip, Y. Huang, K. H. Chan and K. Y. Yuen** **(2006a)**. Molecular diversity of coronaviruses in bats. *Virology* **351**: 180-7. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, U. Wernery, E. Y. Wong, A. K. Tsang, B. Johnson, C. C. Yip, C. C. Lau, S. Sivakumar, J. P. Cai, R. Y. Fan, K. H. Chan, R. Mareena and K. Y. Yuen** **(2014)**. Novel betacoronavirus in dromedaries of the Middle East, 2013. *Emerg Infect Dis* **20**: 560-72. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., S. K. Lau, C. C. Yip, Y. Huang, H. W. Tsoi, K. H. Chan and K. Y. Yuen** **(2006b)**. Comparative analysis of 22 coronavirus HKU1 genomes reveals a novel genotype and evidence of natural recombination in coronavirus HKU1. *J Virol* **80**: 7136-45. [PubMed]

**Woo, P. C., M. Wang, S. K. Lau, H. Xu, R. W. Poon, R. Guo, B. H. Wong, K. Gao, H. W. Tsoi, Y. Huang, K. S. Li, C. S. Lam, K. H. Chan, B. J. Zheng and K. Y. Yuen** **(2007)**. Comparative analysis of twelve genomes of three novel group 2c and group 2d coronaviruses reveals unique group and subgroup features. *J Virol* **81**: 1574-85. [PubMed]

**Worobey, M., J. I. Levy, L. Malpica Serrano, A. Crits-Christoph, J. E. Pekar, S. A. Goldstein, A. L. Rasmussen, M. U. G. Kraemer, C. Newman, M. P. G. Koopmans, M. A. Suchard, J. O. Wertheim, P. Lemey, D. L. Robertson, R. F. Garry, E. C. Holmes, A. Rambaut and K. G. Andersen** **(2022)**. The Huanan seafood wholesale market in Wuhan was the early epicenter of the COVID-19 pandemic. *Science* **377**: 951-9. [PubMed]

**Wu, C. H., P. J. Chen and S. H. Yeh** **(2014)**. Nucleocapsid phosphorylation and RNA helicase DDX1 recruitment enables coronavirus transition from discontinuous to continuous transcription. *Cell Host Microbe* **16**: 462-72. [PubMed]

**Wu, C. H., S. H. Yeh, Y. G. Tsay, Y. H. Shieh, C. L. Kao, Y. S. Chen, S. H. Wang, T. J. Kuo, D. S. Chen and P. J. Chen** **(2009)**. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 regulates the phosphorylation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein and viral replication. *J Biol Chem* **284**: 5229-39. [PubMed]

**Wu, Z., L. Lu, J. Du, L. Yang, X. Ren, B. Liu, J. Jiang, J. Yang, J. Dong, L. Sun, Y. Zhu, Y. Li, D. Zheng, C. Zhang, H. Su, Y. Zheng, H. Zhou, G. Zhu, H. Li, A. Chmura, F. Yang, P. Daszak, J. Wang, Q. Liu and Q. Jin** **(2018)**. Comparative analysis of rodent and small mammal viromes to better understand the wildlife origin of emerging infectious diseases. *Microbiome* **6**: 178. [PubMed]

**Wu, Z., L. Yang, X. Ren, G. He, J. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Qian, J. Dong, L. Sun, Y. Zhu, J. Du, F. Yang, S. Zhang and Q. Jin** **(2016a)**. Deciphering the bat virome catalog to better understand the ecological diversity of bat viruses and the bat origin of emerging infectious diseases. *ISME J* **10**: 609-20. [PubMed]

**Wu, Z., L. Yang, X. Ren, J. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Zhang and Q. Jin** **(2016b)**. ORF8-related genetic evidence for Chinese horseshoe bats as the source of human severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. *J Infect Dis* **213**: 579-83. [PubMed]

**Yan, L., Y. Yang, M. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zheng, J. Ge, Y. C. Huang, Z. Liu, T. Wang, S. Gao, R. Zhang, Y. Y. Huang, L. W. Guddat, Y. Gao, Z. Rao and Z. Lou** **(2021)**. Coupling of N7-methyltransferase and 3'-5' exoribonuclease with SARS-CoV-2 polymerase reveals mechanisms for capping and proofreading. *Cell* **184**: 3474-85 e11. [PubMed]

**Yang, L., Z. Wu, X. Ren, F. Yang, J. Zhang, G. He, J. Dong, L. Sun, Y. Zhu, S. Zhang and Q. Jin** **(2014a)**. MERS-related betacoronavirus in *Vespertilio superans* bats, China. *Emerg Infect Dis* **20**: 1260-2. [PubMed]

**Yang, Y., L. Du, C. Liu, L. Wang, C. Ma, J. Tang, R. S. Baric, S. Jiang and F. Li** **(2014b)**. Receptor usage and cell entry of bat coronavirus HKU4 provide insight into bat-to-human transmission of MERS coronavirus. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **111**: 12516-21. [PubMed]

**Yao, H., Y. Song, Y. Chen, N. Wu, J. Xu, C. Sun, J. Zhang, T. Weng, Z. Zhang, Z. Wu, L. Cheng, D. Shi, X. Lu, J. Lei, M. Crispin, Y. Shi, L. Li and S. Li** **(2020)**. Molecular architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. *Cell* **183**: 730-8 e13. [PubMed]

**Ye, Y. and B. G. Hogue** **(2007)**. Role of the coronavirus E viroporin protein transmembrane domain in virus assembly. *J Virol* **81**: 3597-607. [PubMed]

**Yeager, C. L., R. A. Ashmun, R. K. Williams, C. B. Cardellichio, L. H. Shapiro, A. T. Look and K. V. Holmes** **(1992)**. Human aminopeptidase N is a receptor for human coronavirus 229E. *Nature* **357**: 420-2. [PubMed]

**Yen, H. L., T. H. C. Sit, C. J. Brackman, S. S. Y. Chuk, H. Gu, K. W. S. Tam, P. Y. T. Law, G. M. Leung, M. Peiris, L. L. M. Poon and H.-S. s. team** **(2022)**. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 delta variant (AY.127) from pet hamsters to humans, leading to onward human-to-human transmission: a case study. *Lancet* **399**: 1070-8. [PubMed]

**Yuan, Y., D. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Ma, J. Qi, Q. Wang, G. Lu, Y. Wu, J. Yan, Y. Shi, X. Zhang and G. F. Gao** **(2017)**. Cryo-EM structures of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV spike glycoproteins reveal the dynamic receptor binding domains. *Nat Commun* **8**: 15092. [PubMed]

**Zaki, A. M., S. van Boheemen, T. M. Bestebroer, A. D. Osterhaus and R. A. Fouchier** **(2012)**. Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in Saudi Arabia. *New Engl J Med* **367**: 1814-20. [PubMed]

**Zeng, Q., M. A. Langereis, A. L. van Vliet, E. G. Huizinga and R. J. de Groot** **(2008)**. Structure of coronavirus hemagglutinin-esterase offers insight into corona and influenza virus evolution. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **105**: 9065-9. [PubMed]

**Zhang, R., Y. Li, A. L. Zhang, Y. Wang and M. J. Molina** **(2020)**. Identifying airborne transmission as the dominant route for the spread of COVID-19. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* **117**: 14857-63. [PubMed]

**Zhao, G. P.** **(2007)**. SARS molecular epidemiology: a Chinese fairy tale of controlling an emerging zoonotic disease in the genomics era. *Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci* **362**: 1063-81. [PubMed]

**Zhao, J., A. Falcon, H. Zhou, J. Netland, L. Enjuanes, P. Perez Brena and S. Perlman** **(2009)**. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus protein 6 is required for optimal replication. *J Virol* **83**: 2368-73. [PubMed]

**Zhou, P., H. Fan, T. Lan, X. L. Yang, W. F. Shi, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. W. Zhang, Q. M. Xie, S. Mani, X. S. Zheng, B. Li, J. M. Li, H. Guo, G. Q. Pei, X. P. An, J. W. Chen, L. Zhou, K. J. Mai, Z. X. Wu, D. Li, D. E. Anderson, L. B. Zhang, S. Y. Li, Z. Q. Mi, T. T. He, F. Cong, P. J. Guo, R. Huang, Y. Luo, X. L. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Sun, X. L. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang, S. Z. Xing, Y. S. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Li, P. Daszak, L. F. Wang, Z. L. Shi, Y. G. Tong and J. Y. Ma** **(2018)**. Fatal swine acute diarrhoea syndrome caused by an HKU2-related coronavirus of bat origin. *Nature* **556**: 255-8. [PubMed]

**Zhou, Z., Y. Qiu and X. Ge** **(2021)**. The taxonomy, host range and pathogenicity of coronaviruses and other viruses in the *Nidovirales* order. *Anim Dis* **1**: 5. [PubMed]

**Zhu, N., D. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Li, B. Yang, J. Song, X. Zhao, B. Huang, W. Shi, R. Lu, P. Niu, F. Zhan, X. Ma, D. Wang, W. Xu, G. Wu, G. F. Gao, W. Tan, I. China Novel Coronavirus and T. Research** **(2020)**. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. *New Engl J Med* **382**: 727-33. [PubMed]

**Zhu, X., S. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Luo, Y. Shi, D. Wang, G. Peng, H. Chen, L. Fang and S. Xiao** **(2018)**. Contribution of porcine aminopeptidase N to porcine deltacoronavirus infection. *Emerg Microbes Infect* **7**: 65. [PubMed]

**Ziebuhr, J.** **(2005)**. The coronavirus replicase. *Curr Top Microbiol Immunol* **287**: 57-94. [PubMed]

**Ziebuhr, J., R. S. Baric, S. Baker, R. J. de Groot, C. Drosten, A. Gulyaeva, B. Haagmans, L,,, B. W. Neuman, S. Perlman, L. L. M. Poon, I. Sola and A. E. Gorbalenya (2018**). Reorganization of the family *Coronaviridae* into two families, *Coronaviridae* (including the current subfamily *Coronavirinae* and the new subfamily *Letovirinae*) and the new family *Tobaniviridae* (accommodating the current subfamily *Torovirinae* and three other subfamilies), revision of the genus rank structure and introduction of a new subgenus rank In. Web address: https://talk.ictvonline.org/ICTV/proposals/2017.001S.012-017S.R.Nidovirales.zip.

**Ziebuhr, J., E. J. Snijder and A. E. Gorbalenya** **(2000)**. Virus-encoded proteinases and proteolytic processing in the *Nidovirales*. *J Gen Virol* **81**: 853-79. [PubMed]

**Zuniga, S., J. L. Cruz, I. Sola, P. A. Mateos-Gomez, L. Palacio and L. Enjuanes** **(2010)**. Coronavirus nucleocapsid protein facilitates template switching and is required for efficient transcription. *J Virol* **84**: 2169-75. [PubMed]

**Zuniga, S., I. Sola, S. Alonso and L. Enjuanes** **(2004)**. Sequence motifs involved in the regulation of discontinuous coronavirus subgenomic RNA synthesis. *J Virol* **78**: 980-94. [PubMed]

---


## Resources: Coronaviridae

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Resources: *Coronaviridae*

### Websites

http://www.viprbrc.org/brc/ (VIPR Virus Pathogen Resource)  
http://veb.lumc.nl/SNAD/ (SNAD Sequence Name Annotation-based Designer)

### Sequence alignments and tree files:

**Figure 5A.*Coronaviridae***

Amino acid alignment (FASTA format)

Treefile (Newick format)

**Figure 5B.*Coronaviridae***

Amino acid alignment (FASTA format)

Treefile (Newick format)

---


## Species List: Coronaviridae

#### ICTV Report

Book: Coronaviridae

* Family: Coronaviridae
  + Subfamily: Letovirinae
    - Genus: Alphaletovirus
  + Subfamily: Orthocoronavirinae
    - Genus: Alphacoronavirus
    - Genus: Betacoronavirus
    - Genus: Deltacoronavirus
    - Genus: Gammacoronavirus
  + Subfamily: Pitovirinae
    - Genus: Alphapironavirus
* Authors: Coronaviridae
* Citation: Coronaviridae
* References: Coronaviridae
* Resources: Coronaviridae
* Species List: Coronaviridae

## Species List: *Coronaviridae*

Virus names, the choice of exemplar isolates, and virus abbreviations, are not official ICTV designations  
 Exemplar isolate of the species

---
